and the distinction is not quite so much against the candour and common sense of the world as appears at first ;
in this walk emma and mr weston found all the others assembled ;
it inspired little more than an animating curiosity .
but not to the degree you mention .
“ if i had set my heart on mr elton’s marrying harriet , it would have been very kind to open my eyes ;
and mr elton , just as he ought , entreated for the permission of attending and reading to them again .
how to make her any possible atonement ;
what is to be done ?
“ then it can be no argument to prove that he is in love .
i am a great advocate for timidity and i am sure one does not often meet with it .
their luxury and ease .
but when you mentioned mrs dixon , i felt how much more probable that it should be the tribute of warm female friendship .
i should like to see emma in love , and in some doubt of a return ;
her approbation , at once general and minute , warm and incessant , could not but please ;
he meant to walk with her , she found .
he only hoped “ the young lady’s pride would now be contented ;
i want a change .
good wishes for the future were all that could yet be possible on emma’s side .
and , in short , from knowing his usual ways , i am very much inclined to think that it was for their accommodation the carriage was used at all .
but at present there was nothing more to be said .
this is delightful , is not it ?
with all dear emma’s little faults , she is an excellent creature .
but mr weston was unexpectedly summoned to town and must be absent on the very day .
“ a bad thing !
it does not bear talking of .
making-up indeed would not do .
but when they did arrive at something more like conversation , it was sufficiently clear to her friend that she saw , felt , anticipated , and remembered just as she ought .
the doors of the two rooms were just opposite each other .
the ejaculation in emma’s ear expressed , “ ah !
“ he is very plain , undoubtedly remarkably plain :
” “ at a watering-place , or in a common london acquaintance , it was difficult to decide on such points .
my first displays the wealth and pomp of kings , lords of the earth !
and i hope you will not find he has outstepped the truth more than may be pardoned , in consideration of the motive .
well , pretty good news , is not it ?
she was not present when the suspicion first arose .
“ and you must be off this very morning ?
for as to any real knowledge of a person’s disposition that bath , or any public place , can give it is all nothing ;
emma learned to be rather glad that there had been such a meeting .
“ oh no !
i went for only one night , and could not get away till that very day se’nnight .
so unlike what a man should be !
you will puff her up with such ideas of her own beauty , and of what she has a claim to , that , in a little while , nobody within her reach will be good enough for her .
there go you and your riddle-book one of these days .
had they a large neighbourhood ?
you would rather talk of her person than her mind , would you ?
no none in the least .
i am really tired of exploring so long on one spot .
“ thank you .
mr elton and i are very good friends , and nothing more ;
if he had come at christmas he could not have staid three days ;
“ yes , mr dixon and miss campbell were the persons ;
you begged hard to be commanded to come .
“ yes , do .
she paused over it , while harriet stood anxiously watching for her opinion , with a “ well , well , ” and was at last forced to add , “ is it a good letter ?
and after such success , you know !
you had it from himself , had you ?
in one point she was fully justified .
but as you make no secret of your love of match-making , it is fair to suppose that views , and plans , and projects you have ;
and miss bates being present , it passed , of course , to mrs cole , mrs perry , and mrs elton , immediately afterwards .
yes , my dear , i ran home , as i said i should , to help grandmama to bed , and got back again , and nobody missed me .
too provoking !
he had , in fact , been wholly unsuspicious of his own influence .
“ i shall never be invited to abbey-mill again , ” was said in rather a sorrowful tone .
he can see ready wit in harriet , but will not dine alone for her .
yes , i think it was to randalls .
she will not even listen to your questions .
” and , on the point of living at hartfield , could daringly exclaim , “ rather he than i !
they have more gentleness .
frank churchill caught the name .
what is the foolish girl about ?
m .
“ cannot you , my dear emma cannot you form a guess as to what you are to hear ?
i saw her as i came in ;
a thought of my father’s , which waits only your approbation to be acted upon .
we shall be always meeting !
at another time emma might have been amused , but she was too much astonished now at mr elton’s spirits for other feelings .
these delays and disappointments are quite odious .
i will have nothing to do with it .
and emma very feelingly replied , “ that can be no reason for your being exposed to danger now .
no servant that i want to inquire about of his housekeeper no message from my father .
henceforward i know nothing of the matter .
he told me every thing ;
see the consequence of keeping you company !
“ i cannot separate miss fairfax and her complexion .
as soon as she came to her own name , it was irresistible ;
but here is my father coming :
she had seen only mrs martin and the two girls .
only a little premature .
that was your doing , papa .
and the seeing him so , with the arrival of the little boys and the philosophic composure of her brother on hearing his fate , removed the chief of even emma’s vexation .
other little gallantries and allusions had been dropt , but nothing serious .
the horror of being blocked up at randalls , while her children were at hartfield , was full in her imagination ;
none of that upright integrity , that strict adherence to truth and principle , that disdain of trick and littleness , which a man should display in every transaction of his life .
it was being in miss fairfax’s confidence , and fancying herself acquainted with what was still a secret to other people .
but no sooner did i come to the mention of her being unwell , than i burst out , quite frightened , with bless me !
john knightley only was in mute astonishment .
a piece of paper was found on the table this morning (dropt , we suppose , by a fairy) containing a very pretty charade , and we have just copied it in .
probably a little of both such being the commonest process of a not ill-disposed mind .
it will all come out too soon .
mrs weston and emma were sitting together on a sofa .
if miss woodhouse would not be displeased , she would rather stay at home .
you appear to me a little hoarse already , and when you consider what demand of voice and what fatigues to-morrow will bring , i think it would be no more than common prudence to stay at home and take care of yourself to-night .
she looked back ;
he had gone away deeply offended he came back engaged to another and to another as superior , of course , to the first , as under such circumstances what is gained always is to what is lost .
“ how very pleasing and proper of him !
she had no objection to her telling us , of course , but it was not to go beyond :
“ exactly so the shape of the eye and the lines about the mouth i have not a doubt of your success .
the sun appeared ;
pray do not let them talk of it .
“ yes , upon my word , very considerable .
ladies and gentlemen i am ordered by miss woodhouse to say , that she waives her right of knowing exactly what you may all be thinking of , and only requires something very entertaining from each of you , in a general way .
here’s miss woodhouse .
at first , she thought it was a good deal ;
she was to be conveyed in mr woodhouse’s carriage .
if you and mr woodhouse see no objection , and i trust you cannot , my father hopes his friends will be so kind as to visit him there .
she was working her way up from the bottom , and had therefore leisure to look around , and by only turning her head a little she saw it all .
his is a quiet , indolent , gentlemanlike sort of pride that would harm nobody , and only make himself a little helpless and tiresome ;
a bride , you know , my dear , is always the first in company , let the others be who they may .
but she knows how much the marriage is to miss taylor’s advantage ;
but i cannot imagine how i could be so off my guard .
but she was sorry for harriet :
whenever she is with us , mrs cole does not know how to shew her kindness enough ;
we are rather out of distance of the very striking beauties which attract the sort of parties you speak of ;
he had ridden home through the rain ;
as he became rational , he ought to have roused himself and shaken off all that was unworthy in their authority .
no second meeting had there yet been between him and emma .
now , according to my idea of mrs churchill , it would be most natural , that while she makes no sacrifice for the comfort of the husband , to whom she owes every thing , while she exercises incessant caprice towards him , she should frequently be governed by the nephew , to whom she owes nothing at all .
“ you may well be amazed , ” returned mrs weston , still averting her eyes , and talking on with eagerness , that emma might have time to recover “ you may well be amazed .
miss bates and her niece , with the eltons ;
it was some comfort to him that many inquiries after himself and miss woodhouse (for his neighbours knew that he loved to be inquired after) , as well as miss smith , were coming in during the rest of the day ;
mr weston would take no denial ;
“ well , my dear jane , i believe we must be running away .
courtship a very good hint .
she knew the importance of it , and said every thing in her power to do it away .
“ what did mr weston tell you ?
and when their going farther was resolved on , confessed his wish to be made acquainted with the whole village , and found matter of commendation and interest much oftener than emma could have supposed .
there were three others , jane says , which they hesitated about some time .
but mr knightley is so very fine a man !
it was the work of a moment .
she was in no hurry at all .
“ very beautiful , indeed , ” replied emma ;
“ i have always admired her complexion , ” replied emma , archly ;
she soon believed herself to penetrate mrs elton’s thoughts , and understand why she was , like herself , in happy spirits ;
she spoke with great agitation ;
that , from such a quarter , one might expect .
she soon resolved , equally as a duty and a pleasure , to employ half an hour of this holiday of spirits in calling on miss fairfax .
“ but i should say she was a good-tempered , soft-hearted girl , not likely to be very , very determined against any young man who told her he loved her .
and she came in his way .
with this treatment , mr woodhouse was soon composed enough for talking as usual .
a very few days brought the party from london , and she had no sooner an opportunity of being one hour alone with harriet , than she became perfectly satisfied unaccountable as it was !
for harriet , it would be advantageous and delightful indeed .
the story told well ;
you want your neighbours’ opinions .
miss fairfax , you must not run such risks .
“ oh !
” asked mrs ford .
it is a great deal more natural than one could wish , that a young man , brought up by those who are proud , luxurious , and selfish , should be proud , luxurious , and selfish too .
and had lived nearly twenty-one years in the world with very little to distress or vex her .
she was the youngest of the two daughters of a most affectionate , indulgent father ;
an old story , probably a common case and no more than has happened to hundreds of my sex before ;
“ that’s true , ” she cried “ very true .
a mrs elton would be an excuse for any change of intercourse ;
but i could not reason so to a man in love , and was willing to trust to there being no harm in her , to her having that sort of disposition , which , in good hands , like his , might be easily led aright and turn out very well .
emma could not forgive her ;
my right to place myself in a situation requiring such concealment , is another question .
perhaps it is paid already .
the room at the crown was to witness it ;
“ mr knightley was there too , was he ?
my dear jane , are you sure you did not wet your feet ?
i shall wear a large bonnet , and bring one of my little baskets hanging on my arm .
oh !
but with him , and in the home he offered , there would be the hope of more , of security , stability , and improvement .
“ i saw you first in february .
every door was now closed , the passage plan given up , and the first scheme of dancing only in the room they were in resorted to again ;
he had reached randalls the evening before .
so seldom that a letter , among the thousands that are constantly passing about the kingdom , is even carried wrong and not one in a million , i suppose , actually lost !
and the person , whom she had been so many months neglecting , was now the very one on whom she would have lavished every distinction of regard or sympathy .
you were both talking of other things ;
she wrote to her , therefore , kindly , but decisively , to beg that she would not , at present , come to hartfield ;
she had little hope of mr knightley , none of mr weston .
an arrangement which would probably expose her even to the degradation of being said to be of mrs elton’s party !
perry tells me that mr cole never touches malt liquor .
emma felt the bad taste of her friend , but let it pass with a “ very true ;
and the pianoforte , with every proper discrimination , was pronounced to be altogether of the highest promise .
but having once owned that she had been presumptuous and silly , and self-deceived , before , her pain and confusion seemed to die away with the words , and leave her without a care for the past , and with the fullest exultation in the present and future ;
i cannot recollect .
the remaining five were left to their own powers , and emma doubted their getting on very well ;
four horses and four servants taken out for nothing but to convey five idle , shivering creatures into colder rooms and worse company than they might have had at home .
no sacrifice on any side worth the name .
she was introducing no change in their numbers or their comforts but for the better ;
emma’s very good opinion of frank churchill was a little shaken the following day , by hearing that he was gone off to london , merely to have his hair cut .
yes did not you know ?
” and in this style he talked on for some time very properly , not much attending to any answer , but altogether sufficiently awake to the terror of a bad sore throat ;
“ not quite so miserable as to be insensible to mirth .
and i do not perceive why i should be more in want of employment at forty or fifty than one-and-twenty .
they took themselves off in a hurry .
it would be a disappointment to my father and altogether i do not know that i am rather of opinion that ten couple might stand here very well .
disingenuousness and double dealing seemed to meet him at every turn .
“ very well ;
“ ah !
mr weston , you must really have had aladdin’s lamp .
had she tried to know her better ;
i can only say that there was smoothness outwardly .
and emma , never loth to be first , was obliged to examine it herself .
” cried harriet , warmly .
she would be such a delightful companion for emma .
your friend will not take it amiss i hope .
she had always wanted to do every thing , and had made more progress both in drawing and music than many might have done with so little labour as she would ever submit to .
“ my dear jane , what is this i hear ?
“ it is very unfair to judge of any body’s conduct , without an intimate knowledge of their situation .
he looked with smiling penetration ;
it was by no means her object to have it believed that her sister was not a fine lady ;
but had been very much smartened up by the present proprietor ;
i will not say , that since i entered into the engagement i have not had some happy moments ;
“ what a comfort it is , that we think alike about our nephews and nieces .
but his second must shew him how delightful a well-judging and truly amiable woman could be , and must give him the pleasantest proof of its being a great deal better to choose than to be chosen , to excite gratitude than to feel it .
but for that reason , i should imagine the likeness must be chiefly confined to the females , for boys have very little teaching after an early age , and scramble into any hand they can get .
but her mind had never been in such perturbation ;
he had hoped she would speak again , but she did not .
a devoted wife , a doating mother , and so tenderly attached to her father and sister that , but for these higher ties , a warmer love might have seemed impossible .
“ i dare say they are , sir .
seven miles were travelled in expectation of enjoyment , and every body had a burst of admiration on first arriving ;
while waiting for the carriage , she found mr knightley by her side .
we seemed to understand each other .
when mr cole had moved away , and her attention could be restored as before , she saw frank churchill looking intently across the room at miss fairfax , who was sitting exactly opposite .
mrs elton had received notice of it that morning , and was in raptures .
“ is not she ?
but he did not ;
“ how odd you are !
but the skin , which she had been used to cavil at , as wanting colour , had a clearness and delicacy which really needed no fuller bloom .
and emma said something very civil about the excellence of miss fairfax’s handwriting .
however , as they are so very desirous to have dear emma dine with them , and as you will both be there , and mr knightley too , to take care of her , i cannot wish to prevent it , provided the weather be what it ought , neither damp , nor cold , nor windy .
she then took a longer time for consideration .
it was a great consolation that mr elton should not be really in love with her , or so particularly amiable as to make it shocking to disappoint him that harriet’s nature should not be of that superior sort in which the feelings are most acute and retentive and that there could be no necessity for any body’s knowing what had passed except the three principals , and especially for her father’s being given a moment’s uneasiness about it .
you will betray your feelings improperly , if you are too conscious and too quick , and appear to affix more meaning , or even quite all the meaning which may be affixed to it .
what she is destined to be ?
and the substance of the story , the end of all the dialogue which ensued of surprize , and inquiry , and congratulations on her side , and explanations on miss bates’s , was , that this pianoforte had arrived from broadwood’s the day before , to the great astonishment of both aunt and niece entirely unexpected ;
understanding and gratification came together .
it was settled so , upon the hill , while we were walking about with mr knightley .
i know , indeed , that he is so , and , as such , wish him well .
not that i think mr martin would ever marry any body but what had had some education and been very well brought up .
i was quite a proverb for it at maple grove .
they must encounter each other , and make the best of it .
harriet smith might think herself not unworthy of being peculiarly , exclusively , passionately loved by mr knightley .
you would be amazed to hear how my brother , mr suckling , sometimes flies about .
the mortification and disdain of his brother , the thousand inconveniences to himself .
i wish she were here again .
and on recollecting that an old woman who had nursed him was still living , walked in quest of her cottage from one end of the street to the other ;
and yet without being actually fair .
“ i shall never let that book go out of my own hands , ” said she .
or miss bates ?
that they made a point of visiting no fresh person ;
mr knightley , however , shewed no triumphant happiness .
“ oh !
“ why will not you write one yourself for us , mr elton ?
miss fairfax herself .
they know you do not dine out , ” was not quite sufficient .
and emma , at last , in order to put the martins out of her head , was obliged to hurry on the news , which she had meant to give with so much tender caution ;
it is not a connexion to gratify ;
i know that such a girl as harriet is exactly what every man delights in what at once bewitches his senses and satisfies his judgment .
it did not accord with the rationality of plan , the moderation in expense , or even the unselfish warmth of heart , which she had believed herself to discern in him yesterday .
they had been arrived only a few minutes , and mr weston had scarcely finished his explanation of frank’s being a day before his time , and her father was yet in the midst of his very civil welcome and congratulations , when she appeared , to have her share of surprize , introduction , and pleasure .
“ i wish we had a donkey .
and but for the sense of his son-in-law’s protection , would have been under wretched alarm every night of his life .
there was certainly no harm in his travelling sixteen miles twice over on such an errand ;
her intentions were unchanged .
but for harriet’s sake , or rather for my own , and as there are no husbands and wives in the case at present , i will break my resolution now .
these were the ladies whom emma found herself very frequently able to collect ;
for the lady was the best judge of the difficulties , and the most solicitous for accommodation and appearance .
you do not know it i dare say , but two or three years ago i had a great passion for taking likenesses , and attempted several of my friends , and was thought to have a tolerable eye in general .
let my father’s servant go with you .
little henry was in her thoughts , and a mixture of alarm and delicacy made her irresolute what else to say .
but jane fairfax has them both , harriet .
they might advance rapidly if they would , however ;
it is a pity that they were ever got over .
“ my dearest papa !
and i had almost forgotten one idea that occurred to me this pianoforte that has been sent here by somebody though we have all been so well satisfied to consider it a present from the campbells , may it not be from mr knightley ?
let his behaviour be the guide of your sensations .
” emma could not forgive her .
and what difference did this make in the evils of the connexion ?
“ excuse me , ” said jane earnestly , “ i cannot by any means consent to such an arrangement , so needlessly troublesome to your servant .
you might not see one in a hundred with gentleman so plainly written as in mr knightley .
for instead of going on with her buyings , they began whispering to one another .
the visit had already lasted long ;
it is not a state to be safely entered into with doubtful feelings , with half a heart .
her voice was not unsteady ;
if it were to be shared with the woman he loved , he could not think any man to be pitied for having that house .
mrs hodges may well be angry .
“ ah !
so very obliging !
she will now have but one .
it would do neither of them good , it would do the subject no good , to be talking of it farther .
but it would not do ;
but in good hands she will turn out a valuable woman .
her character appeared absolutely changed .
he told me all about it ;
my dear mr e .
very well i thank you .
sorrow came a gentle sorrow but not at all in the shape of any disagreeable consciousness .
you will hardly believe me but twice in one week he and mr bragge went to london and back again with four horses .
while you considered me as having sinned against emma woodhouse , i could deserve nothing from either .
emma and harriet had been walking together one morning , and , in emma’s opinion , had been talking enough of mr elton for that day .
it was much easier to chat than to study ;
an unevenness in the floor , i believe .
by his style , i should imagine it just settled .
“ such a home , indeed !
but is not this a sudden scheme ?
and though in some points of pursuit or observation there was no positive merit , they shewed , altogether , a good-will towards highbury in general , which must be very like a merit to those he was with .
“ i am afraid , ” returned emma , sighing , “ that i must often have contributed to make her unhappy .
emma was not thinking of it at the moment , which made the information she received more valuable .
i know you are attached to them .
young ladies are delicate plants .
english verdure , english culture , english comfort , seen under a sun bright , without being oppressive .
with the help of spectacles .
” said emma , still perplexed .
he was often hoping , intending to come but was always prevented .
and emma was rather surprized to see the constitution of the weston prevail so decidedly against the habits of the churchills .
my father can direct me .
“ do you know miss bates’s niece ?
he was silent .
it must , if i were not here .
she is loveliness itself .
but at present she could not doubt his having a decidedly warm admiration , a conscious preference of herself ;
too lately for any thing to be yet attempted by her less fortunate friend towards entering on her path of duty ;
the affection , which he had been asking to be allowed to create , if he could , was already his !
he had never suffered any thing like it almost wished he had staid at home nothing killed him like heat he could bear any degree of cold , etc .
the contrast between mrs churchill’s importance in the world , and jane fairfax’s , struck her ;
“ oh !
and can shew it after dinner to convince mr knightley .
papa that is what you never have been able to accomplish , and i do not think you ever will .
i am delighted to find myself in such a circle .
the pleasure is not enhanced , and the inconvenience is often considerable .
he was looking about , he was going to the door , he was watching for the sound of other carriages , impatient to begin , or afraid of being always near her .
“ what is this ?
that is , i presume it to be so on her side , and i can answer for its being so on his .
and yet , she could not help rather anticipating something decisive .
she is reserved , more reserved , i think , than she used to be and i love an open temper .
you must have seen that i did .
i am going this moment .
mr dixon , perhaps , had been very near changing one friend for the other , or been fixed only to miss campbell , for the sake of the future twelve thousand pounds .
we never heard of such things at maple grove .
how he was affected by the studied elegance of her dress , and her smiles of graciousness .
emma knew that she had , but would not own it ;
if not wise or refined herself , she would have connected him with those who were ;
i am very much mistaken if your sex in general would not think such beauty , and such temper , the highest claims a woman could possess .
“ smallridge !’ what does this mean ?
she loves piquet , you know ;
i was the most miserable wretch !
when the suggestions of hope , however , which must follow here , presented themselves , she could not presume to indulge them .
“ i am , ” she answered “ i am fatigued ;
every body who sees it is struck by its beauty ;
.
its character as a ball-room caught him ;
rousing from reflection , therefore , and subduing her emotion , she turned to harriet again , and , in a more inviting accent , renewed the conversation ;
acknowledging it to be her conviction , that all farther confidential discussion of one topic had better be avoided ;
emma and harriet went together ;
emma understood him ;
but while i visit at hartfield , and you are so kind to me , miss woodhouse , i am not afraid of what any body can do .
a woman with fewer resources than i have , need not have been at a loss .
he stopped in his earnestness to look the question , and the expression of his eyes overpowered her .
how jane could bear it at all , was astonishing to emma .
the first part is so very trifling .
i have said nothing about it to any body .
it was now some time since miss taylor had begun to influence his schemes ;
he called for a few moments , just to leave a piece of paper on the table containing , as he said , a charade , which a friend of his had addressed to a young lady , the object of his admiration , but which , from his manner , emma was immediately convinced must be his own .
she had been particularly unwell , however , suffering from headache to a degree , which made her aunt declare , that had the ball taken place , she did not think jane could have attended it ;
he had never been an unhappy man ;
“ oh !
“ well , i believe , if you will excuse me , mr knightley , if you will not consider me as doing a very rude thing , i shall take emma’s advice and go out for a quarter of an hour .
to you , he will talk of farming ;
she knows their ways best ;
but i only mean to say that there are advertising offices , and that by applying to them i should have no doubt of very soon meeting with something that would do .
harriet did not consider herself as having any thing to complain of .
“ there is no necessity for my calling this morning , ” said the young man ;
you will get very tired when tea is over .
she held the parcel towards her , and emma read the words most precious treasures on the top .
his appearance is so much against him , and his manner so bad , that if she ever were disposed to favour him , she is not now .
but not all that either could say could prevent some renewal of alarm at the sight of the snow which had actually fallen , and the discovery of a much darker night than he had been prepared for .
oh !
is not it so ?
for as soon as she came in , she began inquiring after her , jane is so very great a favourite there .
then , with the gladness which must be felt , nay , which he did not scruple to feel , having never believed frank churchill to be at all deserving emma , was there so much fond solicitude , so much keen anxiety for her , that he could stay no longer .
all looked up to them .
“ on this point we have been wretched .
and knowing , as she did , the favourable state of mind of each at this period , it struck her the more .
so that emma found , on being escorted and followed into the second carriage by mr elton , that the door was to be lawfully shut on them , and that they were to have a tête-à-tête drive .
” and emma distinctly heard him add , in a lower tone , before he quitted the room , “ i have been as good as my word .
certain it was that she was to come ;
and she perceived that his wife , who was standing immediately above her , was not only listening also , but even encouraging him by significant glances .
and looked no farther .
she had been decided in wishing for a miss weston .
you must answer it of course and speedily .
and i could not at all bear that he should be sending us more , so liberal as he had been already ;
but had there been much less , or had there been ten times more , the delight and admiration of her two companions would have been the same .
but take care of yourself .
let them be sent to donwell .
and mr suckling is extremely fond of exploring .
the man believed they were gone to hartfield .
“ i would not go away without seeing you , but i have no time to spare , and therefore must now be gone directly .
and there would be poor emma in the carriage behind .
while i , to blind the world to our engagement , was behaving one hour with objectionable particularity to another woman , was she to be consenting the next to a proposal which might have made every previous caution useless ?
“ oh !
miss bates said a great deal ;
neither mr suckling nor me had ever any patience with them ;
the corner of the sofa is very good .
and their first removal , on the departure of the funeral for yorkshire , was to be to the house of a very old friend in windsor , to whom mr churchill had been promising a visit the last ten years .
don’t pretend to be in raptures about mine .
“ i never in my life saw a man more intent on being agreeable than mr elton .
mr woodhouse saw the letter , and he says he never saw such a handsome letter in his life .
humph !
considering the very particular friendship between her and mrs dixon , you could hardly have expected her to be excused from accompanying colonel and mrs campbell .
high in the rank of her most serious and heartfelt felicities , was the reflection that all necessity of concealment from mr knightley would soon be over .
and , between ourselves , the whole blame of it is to be laid to her .
“ it is one that i shall never change , however .
“ so much the better or so much the worse :
she then broke the lace off short , and dexterously throwing it into a ditch , was presently obliged to entreat them to stop , and acknowledged her inability to put herself to rights so as to be able to walk home in tolerable comfort .
the dews of a summer evening are what i would not expose any body to .
” and soon afterwards , “ jane fairfax is a very charming young woman but not even jane fairfax is perfect .
will you ?
his visit he would now defer ;
good soul !
six years hence , if he could meet with a good sort of young woman in the same rank as his own , with a little money , it might be very desirable .
and his daughter resolved to remain with him , that mrs weston might be persuaded away by her husband to the exercise and variety which her spirits seemed to need .
mr weston was following ;
it has been thought of .
“ this man is almost too gallant to be in love , ” thought emma .
did you ever see such dancing ?
“ that is as formidable an image as you could present , harriet ;
“ cautious , very cautious , ” thought emma ;
after this , he made some progress without any pause .
much rather , i confess .
he was not hungry ;
he is to be in town next week , if not sooner .
and the more sensibility you betray of their just horrors , the more i shall like you .
she thought so well of the letter , that when mr knightley came again , she desired him to read it .
and emma admitted her to be the luckiest creature in the world , to have created so steady and persevering an affection in such a man ;
and from his general way of talking in unreserved moments , when there are only men present , i am convinced that he does not mean to throw himself away .
“ well but if any difficulties should arise , my housekeeper is extremely clever .
should she let it pass , and seem to suspect nothing ?
and more than a reasonable , becoming degree of prudence , she was very sure did not belong to mr elton .
“ whoever colonel campbell might employ , ” said frank churchill , with a smile at emma , “ the person has not chosen ill .
dear i think you play the best of the two .
this was the amount of the whole story , of his communication and of harriet’s as soon as she had recovered her senses and speech .
let me entreat you to run no risks .
“ my idea of him is , that he can adapt his conversation to the taste of every body , and has the power as well as the wish of being universally agreeable .
such a companion for herself in the periods of anxiety and cheerlessness before her !
but he does sigh and languish , and study for compliments rather more than i could endure as a principal .
“ but what are you in doubt of ?
and while meanly exerting their power to delay it , are in their hearts not thinking the better of him for submitting to their whims .
he knew her illnesses ;
not even that particular riddle which you have heard me mention ;
emma divined what every body present must be thinking .
to be sitting long after dinner , was a confinement that he could not endure .
with the greatest respect , and the warmest friendship , do i mention miss woodhouse ;
they must both have suffered a great deal under such a system of secresy and concealment .
emma was in the humour to value simplicity and modesty to the utmost ;
“ oh no !
a fine young man certainly is frank churchill .
but augusta , i believe , with her own good-will , would never stir beyond the park paling .’ many a time has she said so ;
mr weston directed the whole , officiating safely between hartfield and the vicarage , and every body was in good time .
but there was a great deal of pain in the process so much to herself at this time , that she soon felt the necessity of a little consolation , and resolved on going home by way of randalls to procure it .
“ you think i ought to refuse him then , ” said harriet , looking down .
alas !
if any thing could be more , where all was most , she was more reserved on the subject of weymouth and the dixons than any thing .
he made no answer ;
for , if we had met first in the drawing-room , i doubt whether you would have discerned me to be more of a gentleman than usual .
his aunt is in the way .
that’s one of the ladies in the irish car party , not at all like her .
a word or two of assent , or disapprobation ;
” then changing from a frown to a smile “ no , do not tell me i do not want to know what you mean .
and till it appears that men are much more philosophic on the subject of beauty than they are generally supposed ;
“ if he could stay only a couple of days , he ought to come ;
quite thick shoes .
she was quite enough pleased with the first day’s sketch to wish to go on .
“ i have reason to think , ” he replied , “ that harriet smith will soon have an offer of marriage , and from a most unexceptionable quarter :
who was so useful to him , who so ready to write his letters , who so glad to assist him ?
and so patty told me , and i was excessively shocked indeed !
few people seem to value simplicity of dress , show and finery are every thing .
emma wished she could have seen her , and tried her own powers ;
the aunt was a capricious woman , and governed her husband entirely ;
but as neither provocation nor resentment were discerned by mr knightley , who had been of the party , and had seen only proper attention and pleasing behaviour on each side , he was expressing the next morning , being at hartfield again on business with mr woodhouse , his approbation of the whole ;
she did not think it in harriet’s nature to escape being benefited by novelty and variety , by the streets , the shops , and the children .
what did she say ?
“ sir , ” said mr woodhouse , rather warmly , “ you are very much mistaken if you suppose mr perry to be that sort of character .
nonsense !
and conceived miss hawkins to have held such a place in society as mrs elton’s consequence only could surpass .
the gala-day to highbury entire , which the sight of him would have made ;
the service he rendered you was enough to warm your heart .
“ in one respect , perhaps , mr elton’s manners are superior to mr knightley’s or mr weston’s .
and it is not the sort of thing that gives me cold .
mr knightley himself would be doing nothing to assist the cure ;
those soft blue eyes , and all those natural graces , should not be wasted on the inferior society of highbury and its connexions .
“ there does , indeed , seem as little to tempt her to break her resolution at present , ” said mrs weston , “ as can well be ;
“ oh !
the picture !
she meant to take her in the carriage , leave her at the abbey mill , while she drove a little farther , and call for her again so soon , as to allow no time for insidious applications or dangerous recurrences to the past , and give the most decided proof of what degree of intimacy was chosen for the future .
“ no , no , ” said emma , “ it will not reckon low .
mrs and miss bates loved to be called on , and she knew she was considered by the very few who presumed ever to see imperfection in her , as rather negligent in that respect , and as not contributing what she ought to the stock of their scanty comforts .
no more exploring parties to donwell made for her .
she had not advanced many yards from mrs goddard’s door , when she was met by mr elton himself , evidently coming towards it , and as they walked on slowly together in conversation about the invalid of whom he , on the rumour of considerable illness , had been going to inquire , that he might carry some report of her to hartfield they were overtaken by mr john knightley returning from the daily visit to donwell , with his two eldest boys , whose healthy , glowing faces shewed all the benefit of a country run , and seemed to ensure a quick despatch of the roast mutton and rice pudding they were hastening home for .
“ miss woodhouse if you are at leisure i have something that i should like to tell you a sort of confession to make and then , you know , it will be over .
to isabella , the relief of such tidings was very great , and they were scarcely less acceptable to emma on her father’s account , who was immediately set as much at ease on the subject as his nervous constitution allowed ;
miss nash , head-teacher at mrs goddard’s , had written out at least three hundred ;
mrs weston looked surprized , and said , “ i did not know that he ever had any such plan .
and it was in every respect so proper , suitable , and unexceptionable a connexion , and in one respect , one point of the highest importance , so peculiarly eligible , so singularly fortunate , that now it seemed as if emma could not safely have attached herself to any other creature , and that she had herself been the stupidest of beings in not having thought of it , and wished it long ago .
it was not in compliment to jane fairfax however that he was so indifferent , or so indignant ;
and when that bend was passed , mr elton was immediately in sight ;
such a very kind attention and so thoughtful an attention !
“ dear mrs weston , how could you think of such a thing ?
a small half-glass , put into a tumbler of water ?
i do not think you would have spoken a good word for me to any body .
while they are with us , we shall explore a great deal , i dare say .
she wanted to be alone .
mrs weston was most comfortably pleased on the occasion .
i only name possibilities .
“ yes , simpleton as i was !
mr knightley , always so kind , so feeling , so truly considerate for every body , would never deserve to be less worshipped than now ;
and mrs martin talks of taking a boy another year .
“ no , i have not ;
fourteen minutes to be given to those with whom she had thankfully passed six weeks not six months ago !
and it being briefly settled among themselves how it might be done without neglecting his comfort how certainly mrs goddard , if not mrs bates , might be depended on for bearing him company mr woodhouse was to be talked into an acquiescence of his daughter’s going out to dinner on a day now near at hand , and spending the whole evening away from him .
and i , trusting that i had written enough , though but a few lines , to satisfy her , remained without any uneasiness .
concession must be out of the question ;
but that would be all over now .
the anxious cares , the incessant attentions of mrs weston , were not thrown away .
how , where , when ?
as you will do it , it will indeed , to use your own words , be an exquisite possession .
all from donwell some of mr knightley’s most liberal supply .
you against , i for him ;
shall i ?
the dread of such a failure after all became the prominent uneasiness ;
emma’s spirits were mounted quite up to happiness ;
but a few weeks brought some alleviation to mr woodhouse .
he cannot want money he cannot want leisure .
always the first person to be thought of !
her cheeks flushed at the name , and she felt afraid of something , though she knew not what .
and walking a few yards forward , while they talked together , soon made her quick eye sufficiently acquainted with mr robert martin .
well , that must be infinitely provoking !
delightful to gather for one’s self the only way of really enjoying them .
i do not consider myself at all a fortunate person .
in jane’s eyes she had been a rival ;
“ his aunt was so much better , that he had not a doubt of getting over to them .
“ the churchills are very likely in fault , ” said mr knightley , coolly ;
and after paying his compliments en passant to miss bates and her niece , made his way directly to the opposite side of the circle , where sat miss woodhouse ;
but such an alternative as this had not occurred to her .
till you chose to turn her into a friend , her mind had no distaste for her own set , nor any ambition beyond it .
i did not see you before .
he reads the agricultural reports , and some other books that lay in one of the window seats but he reads all them to himself .
the intelligence , which had been so anxiously announced to her , she was now to be anxiously announcing to another .
but since we have parted , i can never remember emma’s omitting to do any thing i wished .
where , in compliance with the pressing entreaties of some friends , he had engaged to spend a few weeks , and very much regretted the impossibility he was under , from various circumstances of weather and business , of taking a personal leave of mr woodhouse , of whose friendly civilities he should ever retain a grateful sense and had mr woodhouse any commands , should be happy to attend to them .
harriet blushed and smiled , and said something about wondering that people should like her so much .
but then i moved back my chair a little , a very little , and it did not disturb me .
and they were only waiting for november .
shocking plan , living together .
mr and mrs elton , indeed , shewed no unwillingness to mix , and be as agreeable as they could ;
and besides the consideration of what was due to each brother , she had particular pleasure , from the circumstance of the late disagreement between mr knightley and herself , in procuring him the proper invitation .
and i remember one proof of her being thought to play well :
“ you should have gone to cromer , my dear , if you went anywhere .
some part of his conduct we cannot excuse .
“ the clerks grow expert from habit .
he was immediately qualifying himself to form an opinion , by giving her very proper attention , after the introduction had passed .
we have notice of it in a letter to-day .
she thought it was time to make up .
he is as well acquainted with his own claims , as you can be with harriet’s .
a man would always wish to give a woman a better home than the one he takes her from ;
and as a farmer , as keeping in hand the home-farm at donwell , he had to tell what every field was to bear next year , and to give all such local information as could not fail of being interesting to a brother whose home it had equally been the longest part of his life , and whose attachments were strong .
do you know it ?
however , this does make a difference ;
for a few days , every morning visit in highbury included some mention of the handsome letter mrs weston had received .
they will read together .
i have an idea he was standing just here .
the word was discovered , and with a faint smile pushed away .
and my particular friend , mrs partridge , the lady i have always resided with when in bath , would be most happy to shew you any attentions , and would be the very person for you to go into public with .
.
it was all as it should be :
it was folly to be disturbed by it .
the party was rather large , as it included one other family , a proper unobjectionable country family , whom the coles had the advantage of naming among their acquaintance , and the male part of mr cox’s family , the lawyer of highbury .
but i could not conclude before .
she did most heartily grieve over the idleness of her childhood and sat down and practised vigorously an hour and a half .
and miss bickerton , excessively frightened , gave a great scream , and calling on harriet to follow her , ran up a steep bank , cleared a slight hedge at the top , and made the best of her way by a short cut back to highbury .
it was a right thing to do .
there had been a time when he would have scorned her as a companion , and turned from her with little ceremony .
“ miss fairfax’s compliments and thanks , but is quite unequal to any exercise .
miss bates stood in the very worst predicament in the world for having much of the public favour ;
what say you to mr weston and mr elton ?
and with calmer asperity , added , a few moments afterwards , “ no , he is not her equal indeed , for he is as much her superior in sense as in situation .
goldsmith tells us , that when lovely woman stoops to folly , she has nothing to do but to die ;
all the merit on mine .
i admire all that quaint , old-fashioned politeness ;
he had done his duty and could return to his son .
but indeed i would much rather have it only in one .
and i think he does .
emma knew it to have been very much the case .
jane fairfax and jane fairfax .’ heavens !
but you will soon be tired .
very fit for a wife , but not at all for a governess .
the destiny which bids fair to connect us with two characters so much superior to our own .
mrs goddard , what say you to half a glass of wine ?
“ the regularity and despatch of it !
” they were laying themselves open to that very phrase and to having it sent off in a letter to maple grove by one lady , to ireland by another .
what could she possibly mean !
but two or three times every day harriet was sure just to meet with him , or just to miss him , just to hear his voice , or see his shoulder , just to have something occur to preserve him in her fancy , in all the favouring warmth of surprize and conjecture .
he came to the part of the room where the sitters-by were collected , spoke to some , and walked about in front of them , as if to shew his liberty , and his resolution of maintaining it .
she did look vexed , she did speak pointedly and at last , with a decision of action unusual to her , proposed a removal .
but the last year or two had brought them a considerable increase of means the house in town had yielded greater profits , and fortune in general had smiled on them .
there is nothing they like so much .
it was well lined with the softest cotton ;
as to there being any quantity of snow fallen or likely to fall to impede their return , that was a mere joke ;
a young lady who faints , must be recovered ;
my being saved from pain is a very secondary consideration .
he stopped .
she then proceeded to say a good deal more than she felt , of the advantage of such an addition to their confined society in surry ;
it might be safely viewed with all its appendages of prosperity and beauty , its rich pastures , spreading flocks , orchard in blossom , and light column of smoke ascending .
she felt that half this folly must be drunkenness , and therefore could hope that it might belong only to the passing hour .
“ he is a most fortunate man !
“ i hope he will be here to-morrow , for i have a question or two to ask him about myself of some consequence .
“ whoever might be her parents , ” said mr knightley , “ whoever may have had the charge of her , it does not appear to have been any part of their plan to introduce her into what you would call good society .
mrs weston looked , and looked in vain .
i was saying this to mr cole but yesterday , and he quite agreed with me ;
miss woodhouse , how you do forget !
it had just occurred to mrs weston that mrs elton must be asked to begin the ball ;
“ i had no notion that he liked me so very much , ” said harriet , contemplating the letter .
no far from it certainly plain .
it did , however .
and besides the operation of this , as a general principle , you may be sure that miss fairfax awes mrs elton by her superiority both of mind and manner ;
he was always agreeable and obliging , and speaking pleasantly of every body .
this is great news , indeed .
“ i do remember it , ” cried emma ;
she would sit whenever i asked her .
oh !
they hurried on , and were speedily at randalls .
you can have no superior , but most true on mine .
never better .
you clever creature , that’s very true .
“ but is he sure that harriet means to marry him ?
but on seeing them together , she became perfectly satisfied .
he very much feared that miss fairfax derived more evil than good from them .
it must be all conjecture .
“ i am happy you approved , ” said emma , smiling ;
ah !
have you finished it ?
but still harriet must be excepted .
and emma felt that , till she saw her in the way of cure , there could be no true peace for herself .
the event , however , was most joyful ;
i never could comprehend how mr weston could part with him .
he was the son of mr weston he was continually here i always found him very pleasant and , in short , for (with a sigh) let me swell out the causes ever so ingeniously , they all centre in this at last my vanity was flattered , and i allowed his attentions .
i really never could think well of any body who proposed such a thing to any body else .
and , from that day to this , i never mentioned it to a soul that i know of .
and as for harriet’s feelings , they were visibly forming themselves into as strong and steady an attachment as her youth and sort of mind admitted .
as to all that , of course nothing can be thought of yet .
and was sufficiently employed in looking out the best baked apple for her , and trying to make her help or advise him in his work , till jane fairfax was quite ready to sit down to the pianoforte again .
no ;
bad .
something of a very unpleasant nature , i find , has occurred ;
for they say every body is in love once in their lives , and i shall have been let off easily .
i answered it within an hour ;
let me entreat you , miss woodhouse , to exercise so charming a talent in favour of your friend .
but ever since her being turned into a churchill she has out-churchill’d them all in high and mighty claims :
and if to these losses , the loss of donwell were to be added , what would remain of cheerful or of rational society within their reach ?
, were highly blameable .
my interference was quite as likely to do harm as good .
mrs weston proposed having no regular supper ;
miss hawkins , i dare say , an excellent young woman .
and the perrys i suppose there never was a happier or a better couple than mr and mrs perry .
a degree or two lower , and a creditable appearance might interest me ;
and her last pleasing duty , before she left the house , was to pay her respects to them as they sat together after dinner ;
depend upon it , that was the case :
mr knightley connected it with the dream ;
“ but if i do , i shall be crosser still .
the house was larger than hartfield , and totally unlike it , covering a good deal of ground , rambling and irregular , with many comfortable , and one or two handsome rooms .
while poor mrs churchill lived , i suppose there could not have been a hope , a chance , a possibility ;
pray take care , miss woodhouse , ours is rather a dark staircase rather darker and narrower than one could wish .
yes mr elton , i understand certainly as to dancing mrs cole was telling me that dancing at the rooms at bath was mrs cole was so kind as to sit some time with us , talking of jane ;
she looked back as well as she could ;
certainly not too tall ;
you know i candidly told you i should form my own opinion ;
” thought emma .
she is pretty , and she is good tempered , and that is all .
“ i do not know .
persuaded , that after all his own vaunted claims and disdain of harriet , he had done nothing .
“ well , ” said emma , “ there is no disputing about taste .
that is a degree of placidity , which i can neither comprehend nor respect .
she was deeply ashamed , and a little afraid of his next look .
let every body on the hill hear me if they can .
you have shewn that you can dance , and you know we are not really so much brother and sister as to make it at all improper .
emma was quite eager to see this superior treasure .
it had even given the idea of another .
she wished to see the whole extent .
i never can be blameless .
“ will he , indeed ?
a conundrum of mr weston’s shall clear him and his next neighbour .
selina , who is mild almost to a fault , bore with them much better .
what was to be done ?
he seemed hardly to hear her ;
this is an attachment which a woman may well feel pride in creating .
“ oh !
i believe he is one of the very best-tempered men that ever existed .
all was safe and prosperous ;
a woman is not to marry a man merely because she is asked , or because he is attached to her , and can write a tolerable letter .
i have not always known their writing apart .
that is , i always had a strong persuasion he would be here again soon , i was sure something favourable would turn up but nobody believed me .
they were soon joined by some of the gentlemen ;
and , fortunately , what ought to be , and must be , seemed already beginning , and in the most gradual , natural manner .
i dare say we shall be all safe at hartfield before midnight .
but it was impossible to quarrel with words , whose tremulous inequality shewed indisposition so plainly , and she thought only of how she might best counteract this unwillingness to be seen or assisted .
i could not think about you so much without doating on you , faults and all ;
it may bring many extenuations .
and while she was still hanging over muslins and changing her mind , emma went to the door for amusement .
it was all in unison ;
“ perfectly , perfectly right , my dearest harriet ;
“ a straightforward , open-hearted man like weston , and a rational , unaffected woman like miss taylor , may be safely left to manage their own concerns .
she is a flatterer in all her ways ;
it was so long since emma had been at the abbey , that as soon as she was satisfied of her father’s comfort , she was glad to leave him , and look around her ;
she wished she might be able to keep him from an absolute declaration .
but , now that she has written her letters , she says she shall soon be well .
and capable of being sometimes out of humour .
and we are not to be addressing our conduct to fools .
“ i went only to the post-office , ” said she , “ and reached home before the rain was much .
the result of his reverie was , “ no , emma , i do not think the extent of my admiration for her will ever take me by surprize .
the disguise , equivocation , mystery , so hateful to her to practise , might soon be over .
if they wish to have you settled in the same country and circle which they have chosen to place you in , here it will be accomplished ;
“ i wish you would read it with a kinder spirit towards him .
she saw it all ;
“ i have lately imagined that i saw symptoms of attachment between them certain expressive looks , which i did not believe meant to be public .
“ your gallantry is really unanswerable .
can i do any thing for you ?
mr weston , his son , emma , and harriet , only remained ;
shall we have rain ?
he came with mrs weston , to whom and to highbury he seemed to take very cordially .
“ well , i always shall think that you play quite as well as she does , or that if there is any difference nobody would ever find it out .
“ you are extremely kind , ” replied miss bates , highly gratified ;
and who but mr knightley could know and bear with mr woodhouse , so as to make such an arrangement desirable !
and it was good enough .
how should i ever have borne it !
but i would have given worlds all the worlds one ever has to give for another half-hour .
he perfectly knew his own meaning ;
emma thought it most prudent to go with her .
there is hardly any other that i could be satisfied to have my children in :
“ so obliged to you !
i beg you will not let your neighbours follow your example .
frank had already written to enscombe to propose staying a few days beyond his fortnight , which could not possibly be refused .
and by this time were , in fortune and style of living , second only to the family at hartfield .
by this time , the walk in the rain had reached mrs elton , and her remonstrances now opened upon jane .
i do not know whether he has any design of ingratiating himself with either of us , harriet , by additional softness , but it strikes me that his manners are softer than they used to be .
“ i do not know why you should say so .
who had been at pains to give harriet notions of self-consequence but herself ?
who but herself had taught her , that she was to elevate herself if possible , and that her claims were great to a high worldly establishment ?
” cried his wife .
i dare not let my mother know how little she eats so i say one thing and then i say another , and it passes off .
“ and while mrs weston pays her visit , i may be allowed , i hope , ” said frank churchill , “ to join your party and wait for her at hartfield if you are going home .
“ i think her beautiful , quite beautiful .
but she presently found that it was a family of old friends , who were coming , like herself , by particular desire , to help mr weston’s judgment ;
why not seize the pleasure at once ?
“ yes .
“ but miss bates and miss fairfax !
“ poor knightley !
and when her eyes fell only on the butcher with his tray , a tidy old woman travelling homewards from shop with her full basket , two curs quarrelling over a dirty bone , and a string of dawdling children round the baker’s little bow-window eyeing the gingerbread , she knew she had no reason to complain , and was amused enough ;
they would catch worse colds at the crown than anywhere .
her father and harriet .
with respect to her father , it was a question soon answered .
his manners , however , must have been unmarked , wavering , dubious , or she could not have been so misled .
but when they are over , i imagine there will be nothing more to wait for .
and it made her quite angry .
“ i think , harriet , since your acquaintance with us , you have been repeatedly in the company of some such very real gentlemen , that you must yourself be struck with the difference in mr martin .
the simplicity and cheerfulness of her nature , her contented and grateful spirit , were a recommendation to every body , and a mine of felicity to herself .
bear with the truths i would tell you now , dearest emma , as well as you have borne with them .
i hope it is a dry situation , and that her health will be taken good care of .
the fact was , as emma could now acknowledge , that harriet had always liked robert martin ;
mr weston was to call in the evening , and she must return it by him .
they lived beyond their income , but still it was nothing in comparison of enscombe :
but i believe i am nice ;
i certainly will not persuade myself to feel more than i do .
it was a bad business .
it made him so very unhappy , indeed , that it could not be persevered in .
“ now , ma’am , ” said jane to her aunt , “ shall we join mrs elton ?
and certainly there never was such a keeping apple anywhere as one of his trees i believe there is two of them .
“ i am sure william larkins will not like it .
but you understand me .
for “ such things , ” he observed , “ always got about .
do not you remember , mrs weston , employing him to write for you one day ?
and what could be worse than dancing without space to turn in ?
however , she will not find her grandmama at all deafer than she was two years ago ;
perhaps i may sometimes have felt that harriet would not forget what was due or rather what would be kind by me .
the two last dances before supper were begun , and harriet had no partner ;
and so then , in my nonsense , i could not help making a treasure of it so i put it by never to be used , and looked at it now and then as a great treat .
“ open the windows !
“ i never heard any county but surry called so .
“ you are speaking of letters of business ;
“ emma , my love , you said that this circumstance would not now make you unhappy ;
harriet had been conscious of a difference in his behaviour ever since those two decisive dances .
“ how d’ye do ?
her first partner was mr elton , i do not know who will ask her next , perhaps mr william cox .’ my dear sir , you are too obliging .
he is half way to windsor by this time .
she still thought herself a better judge of such a point of female right and refinement than he could be ;
his evils seemed to lessen , her own advantages to increase , their mutual good to outweigh every drawback .
“ that is my chief consolation .
he will settle for me ;
“ you forget how much she belongs to highbury .
it will not do to invite five couple .
” and she , “ only to be sure it was paying him too great a compliment , but she did think there were some looks a little like mr elton .
nothing can be farther from pleasure than to be dancing in a crowd and a crowd in a little room !
“ yes , to be sure , i suppose there are .
no such importation of novelties could enrich their intellectual stores at present .
we shall only be making each other more angry .
do you suppose she does not often say all this to herself ?
but the worst was overcome , the idea was given ;
and jane became their guest , paying them long visits and growing a favourite with all ;
every thing so good !
but i had no idea that he could be so very clownish , so totally without air .
mrs elton , before she could be spoken to , was ready ;
miss woodhouse , we must exert ourselves and endeavour to do something for her .
upon my word , mr e .
she did not , could not , feel equal to lead the way to any such subject .
“ i shall always be very sorry that you went to the sea this autumn , instead of coming here .
but where is the advantage of a house of her own ?
“ and do you see her , sir , tolerably often ?
“ ah !
her father was sure of his rubber .
and as emma saw his spirits affected by the idea of his daughter’s attachment to her husband , she immediately led to such a branch of the subject as must raise them .
if you need farther explanation , i have the honour , my dear madam , of being your husband’s son , and the advantage of inheriting a disposition to hope for good , which no inheritance of houses or lands can ever equal the value of .
poor jane is ill !’ which my mother , being on the watch , heard distinctly , and was sadly alarmed at .
every thing tender and charming was to mark their parting ;
he was to leave them early the next day ;
and a fine ending and there is the letter .
if colonel campbell is not the person , who can be ?
“ i am glad you approve of what i have done , ” said he very comfortably .
mr weston , who had been a widower so long , and who seemed so perfectly comfortable without a wife , so constantly occupied either in his business in town or among his friends here , always acceptable wherever he went , always cheerful mr weston need not spend a single evening in the year alone if he did not like it .
and , if she live to old age , must probably sink more .
“ no , indeed , i shall grant you nothing .
there is always some talent in it .
“ part of my lace is gone , ” said she , “ and i do not know how i am to contrive .
“ yes , very soon .
that’s a great pity ;
he was extremely anxious to shew his approbation to miss fairfax and her family , and did not conceive that any suspicion could be excited by it ;
but with regard to these children , i observe we never disagree .
i wonder whether jane has any suspicion .
i like old friends ;
the frank churchill so long talked of , so high in interest , was actually before her he was presented to her , and she did not think too much had been said in his praise ;
“ such sweet lines !
and though it may cut him off from some advantages , it will secure him many others .
“ how sorry i am !
why should he marry ?
and if it never occurred to you before , you may as well take it into consideration now .
” was his reply , but not at all in anger .
“ yes , ” said his brother hesitatingly , “ there is a likeness .
and she read it with a degree of pleasure and admiration which made her at first shake her head over her own sensations , and think she had undervalued their strength .
i had not observed .
cabbage-beds would have been enough to tempt the lady , who only wanted to be going somewhere .
“ upon my honour , ” said he very seriously , “ it does not .
the contrivances of modern days indeed have rendered a gentleman’s carriage perfectly complete .
with the fortitude of a devoted novitiate , she had resolved at one-and-twenty to complete the sacrifice , and retire from all the pleasures of life , of rational intercourse , equal society , peace and hope , to penance and mortification for ever .
“ what does all that signify ?
she was not obliged to hear .
his wife gave him a look which invited him in ;
i want you to call me something else , but i do not know what .
“ well , sir , ” cried mr weston , “ as i took miss taylor away , it is incumbent on me to supply her place , if i can ;
“ i do not offer it for miss smith’s collection , ” said he .
i will do my best .
the like reserve prevailed on other topics .
but that was scouted as a wretched suggestion .
“ it will be natural for me , ” he added shortly afterwards , “ to speak my opinion aloud as i read .
employment i do not want ;
but when he took out his pencil , there was so little lead that he soon cut it all away , and it would not do , so you lent him another , and this was left upon the table as good for nothing .
he might naturally be rather attentive than otherwise to them ;
i wish i could recollect more of it .
“ it is a sort of thing which nobody could have expected .
and with a smile , and shake of the head , which spoke much , she looked at mr knightley .
the marriage of lieut .
i did not mention a syllable of it in the other room .
“ have you any idea of mr knightley’s returning your affection ?
“ emma !
“ in that respect how unlike dear mrs elton , who wants to be wiser and wittier than all the world !
mrs churchill , after being disliked at least twenty-five years , was now spoken of with compassionate allowances .
it is my daily errand .
can it be woman ?
you only mean , that he intends it .
“ i lay it down as a general rule , harriet , that if a woman doubts as to whether she should accept a man or not , she certainly ought to refuse him .
and now i can tolerably comprehend his behaviour .
“ no it will not be worth while .
and when he had drank his tea he was quite ready to go home ;
he has encouragement enough to proceed , without our sighing out our souls over this charade .
and he had , therefore , earnestly tried to dissuade them from having any wedding-cake at all , and when that proved vain , as earnestly tried to prevent any body’s eating it .
but i can remember nothing ;
” cried emma , “ i know there is not a better creature in the world :
they are ripening fast .
and having satisfied the inquiries of his wife as to his dinner , convincing her that none of all her careful directions to the servants had been forgotten , and spread abroad what public news he had heard , was proceeding to a family communication , which , though principally addressed to mrs weston , he had not the smallest doubt of being highly interesting to every body in the room .
“ my mother’s deafness is very trifling you see just nothing at all .
“ she thinks herself wrong , then , for having consented to a private engagement ?
and , to her great amusement , perceived that she was taking the other side of the question from her real opinion , and making use of mrs weston’s arguments against herself .
for mrs weston was too anxious for his being a favourite with mr woodhouse , to betray any imperfection which could be concealed .
his father’s disposition :’ he is unjust , however , to his father .
you will not object to my reading the charade to him .
but to me , it has been quite a home .
how could she have exposed herself to such ill opinion in any one she valued !
sometimes , indeed , i have thought you were half suspecting me of pleading poor martin’s cause , which was never the case ;
still , however , having proceeded so far , one is unwilling to give the matter up .
i can hardly believe it .
he had found her agitated and low .
and every thing gives way to her .
this proposal of his , this plan of marrying and continuing at hartfield the more she contemplated it , the more pleasing it became .
“ you had better order the carriage directly , my love , ” said she ;
have you heard from mrs john knightley lately ?
he knows it to be so , by his promises and messages ;
it was too wretched !
“ i was just going to mention it .
he felt the disappointment of the young man , and was mortified to have been the means of promoting it , by the sanction he had given ;
harriet exactly .
oh !
“ but you will come again , ” said emma .
a point of some dignity , as well as some convenience :
the joy , the gratitude , the exquisite delight of her sensations may be imagined .
and at last donwell was settled for one day , and box hill for the next , the weather appearing exactly right .
“ yes , sir , i did indeed ;
he was so very cheerful in his civilities indeed , that she began to think he must have received a different account of harriet from what had reached her .
the good was all to myself , by making you an object of the tenderest affection to me .
he wants to be introduced to her .
what an idea !
“ that is , ” replied mr knightley , “ she will indulge her even more than she did you , and believe that she does not indulge her at all .
bless me !
i have been always telling you , my love , that i had no idea of the change being so very material to hartfield as you apprehended ;
i dare say , miss fairfax , that he either gave his friend very minute directions , or wrote to broadwood himself .
always deceived in fact by his own wishes , and regardless of little besides his own convenience .
“ it is not fair , ” said emma , in a whisper ;
perfect happiness , even in memory , is not common ;
mrs cole was telling that she had been calling on miss bates , and as soon as she entered the room had been struck by the sight of a pianoforte a very elegant looking instrument not a grand , but a large-sized square pianoforte ;
“ not at all , sir .
just behind .
there is no admiration between them , i do assure you ;
till now that she was threatened with its loss , emma had never known how much of her happiness depended on being first with mr knightley , first in interest and affection .
mr knightley was to dine with them rather against the inclination of mr woodhouse , who did not like that any one should share with him in isabella’s first day .
things must come to a crisis soon now .
no hairdresser from london i think could .
“ have you heard from her yourself this morning ?
“ they would have solicited the honour earlier , but had been waiting the arrival of a folding-screen from london , which they hoped might keep mr woodhouse from any draught of air , and therefore induce him the more readily to give them the honour of his company .
the mistake had been slight .
“ you take up an idea , mrs weston , and run away with it ;
the more i think of it , the more probable it appears .
he ought to be dancing , not classing himself with the husbands , and fathers , and whist-players , who were pretending to feel an interest in the dance till their rubbers were made up , so young as he looked !
“ true , true , ” cried mr knightley , with most ready interposition “ very true .
“ this will not be your only visit to randalls .
but a sanguine temper , though for ever expecting more good than occurs , does not always pay for its hopes by any proportionate depression .
and that really is the reason why the instrument was bought or else i am sure we ought to be ashamed of it .
henry is the eldest , he was named after me , not after his father .
emma communicated her news of jane fairfax , and her dependence on the effect was justified ;
“ not a walk in the rain , i should imagine .
mr churchill’s loss would be dreadful indeed .
and though his answer was in the spirit of cutting the matter short , she believed it to indicate only his disinclination to dwell on any kindness of his own .
had she done her part towards intimacy ;
don’t disturb him .
“ oh !
nothing , but to grow more worthy of him , whose intentions and judgment had been ever so superior to her own .
oh !’ said he , i do think i can fasten the rivet ;
while you were at all in suspense i kept my feelings to myself , but now that you are so completely decided i have no hesitation in approving .
mr knightley had once told her it was because she saw in her the really accomplished young woman , which she wanted to be thought herself ;
what do you say to it ?
if one could ascertain what the chief of them the coles , for instance .
harriet was one of those , who , having once begun , would be always in love .
you cannot be ignorant , mrs elton , of my connexion with the family , nor of the treatment i have met with ;
so emma thought , at least .
she was in the adjoining chamber while she still spoke , and opening the casement there , immediately called mr knightley’s attention , and every syllable of their conversation was as distinctly heard by the others , as if it had passed within the same apartment .
a very successful visit :
it was true that her friend was going only half a mile from them ;
“ upon my word , my dear , i do not know , for i never heard the subject talked of .
and as i looked at her , though i never saw her appear to more advantage , it struck me that she was heated , and would therefore be particularly liable to take cold .
i think it would be much better if they would come in one afternoon next summer , and take their tea with us take us in their afternoon walk ;
but it was too tender a subject .
mrs goddard , and the teachers , and the girls and the affairs of the school in general , formed naturally a great part of the conversation and but for her acquaintance with the martins of abbey-mill farm , it must have been the whole .
never had she been more surprized , seldom more delighted , than at that instant .
“ i mean that he has done it , ” answered mr knightley , with smiling but determined decision , “ and been accepted .
and yet , who can say how soon it may all vanish from my mind ?
but in time they will .
she had brought evil on harriet , on herself , and she too much feared , on mr knightley .
“ no , i do not ;
if one is blown over in the bleak part of the common field there will be the other at hand .
mrs smallridge is in a great hurry .
something occurred while they were at hartfield , to make emma want their advice ;
mr woodhouse came in , and very soon led to the subject again , by the recurrence of his very frequent inquiry of “ well , my dears , how does your book go on ?
my liveliness and your solidity would produce perfection .
it was perfectly accordant with that resolution of character which i knew her to possess ;
and i do pity her from my heart .
“ i will see that there are umbrellas , sir , ” said frank to his father :
and for my part , i would rather , under such circumstances , fall short by two than exceed by two .
i could not give any connected detail yesterday ;
“ i wonder he did not remember the book ” was all harriet’s answer , and spoken with a degree of grave displeasure which emma thought might be safely left to itself .
mrs weston was sorry for such a charge .
this is all that i can relate of the how , where , and when .
“ well , and that is as early as most men can afford to marry , who are not born to an independence .
she returned , and sooner than had been talked of , and with an agitated , hurried look , announcing something extraordinary to have happened which she was longing to tell .
she came forward with an offered hand ;
do you understand ?
yes , harriet , just so long have i been wanting the very circumstance to happen that has happened .
i am so glad .
her father’s business was to announce james’s being gone out to put the horses to , preparatory to their now daily drive to randalls ;
“ ah !
has never excited a greater interest ;
“ i do not think he is conceited either , in general , ” said harriet , her conscience opposing such censure ;
” was mr woodhouse’s first exclamation , and all that he could say for some time .
and when the chances of his military life had introduced him to miss churchill , of a great yorkshire family , and miss churchill fell in love with him , nobody was surprized , except her brother and his wife , who had never seen him , and who were full of pride and importance , which the connexion would offend .
she was proved to have been universally mistaken ;
“ and mrs perry and the children , how are they ?
“ it is not that such a circumstance would now make me unhappy , but i cannot believe it .
we must do whatever is to be done quickest , and i think our feelings will lose no time there .
and not all that could be urged to detain her succeeded .
my representation , you see , has quite appeased her .
i am very fond of hearing miss bates talk .
her heart was in a glow , and she feared her face might be as hot .
he had been sitting with them half an hour , she found .
mr woodhouse told me of it .
no ;
no , no ;
i shall not attempt to deny emma’s being pretty .
he had not much intercourse with any families beyond that circle ;
“ will you ?
the business was finished , and harriet safe .
neither of them very like therefore .
though her nephew had had no particular reason to hasten back on her account , she had not lived above six-and-thirty hours after his return .
they are always so pleased to see my children .
“ emma knows i never flatter her , ” said mr knightley , “ but i meant no reflection on any body .
i am sure you must have been struck by his awkward look and abrupt manner , and the uncouthness of a voice which i heard to be wholly unmodulated as i stood here .
yes she will have her own room , of course ;
it was with him , of so simple , yet so dignified a nature .
of the pianoforte so much talked of , i feel it only necessary to say , that its being ordered was absolutely unknown to miss f , who would never have allowed me to send it , had any choice been given her .
and when they parted , emma observed her to be looking around with a sort of fearful curiosity , which determined her not to allow the visit to exceed the proposed quarter of an hour .
she gives a good account of her own health ;
” said she .
and , excepting her own partner , there was not one among the whole row of young men who could be compared with him .
and then follows the application , which i think , my dear harriet , you cannot find much difficulty in comprehending .
“ jane fairfax has feeling , ” said mr knightley “ i do not accuse her of want of feeling .
could he have thought himself encouraged , his looks and language at parting would have been different .
how do you like my trimming ?
most cordially , when miss bates arrived , did she agree that it must .
he has no occasion to marry , either to fill up his time or his heart .
serle understands boiling an egg better than any body .
find some body for me .
emma wondered on what , of all the medley , she would fix .
” cried the good-hearted mrs john knightley .
the kind-hearted , gentle mrs weston had left her seat to join him and say , “ do not you dance , mr elton ?
and even if i have not underrated him hitherto , he may yet turn out well .
you , miss woodhouse , i well know , play delightfully .
but this invitation was not given with equal satisfaction , and on many accounts emma was particularly pleased by harriet’s begging to be allowed to decline it .
and , therefore , i should not think of mentioning it to any body but you , but he said you knew it .
mr knightley grew angry .
i shall soon have done .
you must have done well .
mr weston , however , too eager to be very observant , too communicative to want others to talk , was very well satisfied with what she did say , and soon moved away to make the rest of his friends happy by a partial communication of what the whole room must have overheard already .
and all the probabilities of circumstance and connexion were in her favour .
and yet there was no preventing a laugh , sometimes in the very midst of them .
these days of confinement would have been , but for her private perplexities , remarkably comfortable , as such seclusion exactly suited her brother , whose feelings must always be of great importance to his companions ;
it is very odd , but i cannot recollect .
ours are all apple-tarts .
“ as to the circumstances of her birth , though in a legal sense she may be called nobody , it will not hold in common sense .
her feelings altered towards emma .
and , before the door had shut them out , she heard miss bates saying , “ well , my dear , i shall say you are laid down upon the bed , and i am sure you are ill enough .
could she be secure of that , indeed , of his never marrying at all , she believed she should be perfectly satisfied .
i do not wonder at you .
“ about jane fairfax .
indeed i do you justice , my good friend .
they are generally a very positive curse .
harriet’s cheerful look and manner established hers :
compare mr martin with either of them .
it is a beautiful moonlight night ;
mr elton seemed very properly struck and delighted by the idea , and was repeating , “ no husbands and wives in the case at present indeed , as you observe .
“ but i , ” he soon added , “ who have had no such charm thrown over my senses , must still see , hear , and remember .
“ i did , ” replied emma , “ and they cannot forgive me .
he was a nervous man , easily depressed ;
he was accused of having a delightful voice , and a perfect knowledge of music ;
jane will be only four miles from maple grove .
and afterwards , as the idea of the party to be assembled there , consisting precisely of those whose society was dearest to her , occurred again and again , she did not know that she might not have been tempted to accept .
the whole party breaking up .
and as to my poor word success ,’ which you quarrel with , i do not know that i am so entirely without any claim to it .
and another might predict disagreements among their servants ;
“ and what are we to do for a proper partner for her ?
i made her take her shawl for the evenings are not warm her large new shawl mrs dixon’s wedding-present .
“ prejudiced !
his mother is perfectly right not to be in a hurry .
she wanted to be of use to her ;
this lesson , she very much feared , they would receive only from herself ;
he said , from the first , it was a very good sort which was our great comfort ;
emma encouraged her talkativeness amused by such a picture of another set of beings , and enjoying the youthful simplicity which could speak with so much exultation of mrs martin’s having “ two parlours , two very good parlours , indeed ;
and each was occasionally useful as a check to the other .
but i have been so pleasantly detained !
“ that will never be , however , i can assure you .
she regained the street happy in this , that though much had been forced on her against her will , though she had in fact heard the whole substance of jane fairfax’s letter , she had been able to escape the letter itself .
seldom can it happen that something is not a little disguised , or a little mistaken ;
her gestures and movements might be understood by any one who looked on like emma ;
no ;
“ i can never think of it without laughing .
oh !’ said he , i can fasten the rivet .
all the better .
i like a job of that sort excessively .’ i never shall forget his manner .
who makes you their confidant ?
a very handsome summer-house , large enough to hold a dozen people .
had he said any thing to bear a different construction , i should not have believed him .
he had no idea of me .
she had taken up a wrong idea , fancying it was a mother and daughter , a son and son’s wife , who all lived together ;
she is still nearer .
with so much perseverance in judging and behaving ill did mrs elton engross jane fairfax and slight herself .
you understand every thing .
had we been met walking together between donwell and highbury , the truth must have been suspected .
she would not be in a hurry to find fault , but she suspected that there was no elegance ;
would not he like to have him always on the spot ?
in general he was judged , throughout the parishes of donwell and highbury , with great candour ;
they were never tolerated at maple grove .
they are not at all the less written you know , because you divide them .
“ you mean to return a favourable answer , i collect .
of her being taught only what very limited means could command , and growing up with no advantages of connexion or improvement , to be engrafted on what nature had given her in a pleasing person , good understanding , and warm-hearted , well-meaning relations .
mr wingfield thinks the vicinity of brunswick square decidedly the most favourable as to air .
never thoroughly stopped by any thing till mr woodhouse came into the room ;
that’s right .
thought herself a most fortunate creature , and surrounded with blessings in such an excellent mother , and so many good neighbours and friends , and a home that wanted for nothing .
good mr perry how is he , sir ?
you must all endeavour to comprehend the exact nature of my situation when i first arrived at randalls ;
her name was not mentioned ;
“ no , depend upon it , (with a gallant bow ,) that in addressing mrs weston i should understand whom i might praise without any danger of being thought extravagant in my terms .
she had not deserved it ;
“ oh !
jane desired me to do it , so i always do :
and happiness must preclude false indulgence and physic .
how to spare her from any unnecessary pain ;
no i hope i shall not be ridiculous about it .
he anticipated nothing in the visit that could be at all worth the purchase ;
but his temper was not his great perfection ;
if he were deficient there , nothing should make amends for it .
every body is asleep !
it was her own choice to give the time of their absence to highbury ;
“ very pretty , sir , upon my word ;
“ is she unwell ?
he was clerk to my poor father twenty-seven years ;
have you , upon your honour ?’ said she ;
mr knightley suspected in frank churchill the determination of catching her eye he seemed watching her intently in vain , however , if it were so jane passed between them into the hall , and looked at neither .
i certainly have been misunderstanding you , if you feel in doubt as to the purport of your answer .
he had his shepherd’s son into the parlour one night on purpose to sing to her .
he had , by that time , realised an easy competence enough to secure the purchase of a little estate adjoining highbury , which he had always longed for enough to marry a woman as portionless even as miss taylor , and to live according to the wishes of his own friendly and social disposition .
if you mean a fling at the slave-trade , i assure you mr suckling was always rather a friend to the abolition .
it is fit that the fortune should be on his side , for i think the merit will be all on hers .
i love to hear you .
on the subject of the first of the two circumstances , she did , after a little reflection , venture the following question .
and for harriet’s , in the hope that all would yet turn out right , she was even positively civil ;
such things in general cannot be too short .
“ but why should you be sorry , sir ?
have not i some right to complain ?
i should certainly have called at hartfield , had you failed to come .
perhaps she might have passed over more had his manners been flattering to isabella’s sister , but they were only those of a calmly kind brother and friend , without praise and without blindness ;
much better employed talking to the young ladies .
no , he could not believe it a bad house ;
“ no , indeed you are mistaken .
tea passed pleasantly , and nobody seemed in a hurry to move .
we shall have no occasion to open the windows at all not once the whole evening ;
he had thought of no other place .
his good friend perry , too , whom he had spoken to on the subject , did not at present recollect any thing of the riddle kind ;
the second , was his having sat talking with her nearly half an hour before emma came back from her visit , the very last morning of his being at hartfield though , when he first came in , he had said that he could not stay five minutes and his having told her , during their conversation , that though he must go to london , it was very much against his inclination that he left home at all , which was much more (as emma felt) than he had acknowledged to her .
men of sense , whatever you may chuse to say , do not want silly wives .
“ you had better explore to donwell , ” replied mr knightley .
they were all disengaged and all happy .
this was one of her expressions .
better accommodations , he can promise them , and not a less grateful welcome than at randalls .
a thousand vexatious thoughts would recur .
i have been so grieved for you .
we shall walk back together , and i must be off immediately .
a small mixture of reproach , with a great deal of kindness ;
and besides , what was the value of harriet’s description ?
i can allow for the fears of the child , but not of the man .
she wanted neither taste nor spirit in the little things which are generally acceptable , and could accompany her own voice well .
she must see more of him to understand his ways ;
“ for when a lady’s in the case , “ you know all other things give place .
emma could not help laughing as she answered , “ upon my word , i believe you know her quite as well as i do .
i thought i had seen you first in february .
as she sat one morning , looking forward to exactly such a close of the present day , a note was brought from mrs goddard , requesting , in most respectful terms , to be allowed to bring miss smith with her ;
“ nay , why do you ?
and he , finding every thing perfect .
“ i have not been working uninterruptedly , ” he replied , “ i have been assisting miss fairfax in trying to make her instrument stand steadily , it was not quite firm ;
she could not be too soon alarmed , nor send for perry too often .
how she could have been so deceived !
and for some time she could only exclaim , and require confirmation , repeated confirmation .
but now , poor girl , her peace is cut up for some time .
absurd and insufferable !
i happened to meet him in the street .
such a change !
i knew it would be so .
but which now , in her own estimation , meant nothing , though in the judgment of most people looking on it must have had such an appearance as no english word but flirtation could very well describe .
“ i do not say it is so ;
she must , in all probability , have been spared from every pain which pressed on her now .
she always travels with her own sheets ;
i think they are , without exception , the most vulgar girls in highbury .
“ oh !
in that very room she had been measured last september , with her two friends .
mrs elton had undoubtedly the advantage , at this time , in vanity completely gratified ;
for private enjoyment ;
emma laughed and disclaimed .
while he stood , as if meaning to go , but not going her father began his inquiries .
“ nor , if you were , could i ever bear to part with you , my harriet .
i have not an idea i cannot guess it in the least .
even pleasure , you know , is fatiguing and i cannot say that any of them seemed very much to have enjoyed it .
how peculiarly unprepared i was !
emma watched the entree of her own particular little friend ;
what a strange thing love is !
the very want of such equality might prevent his perception of it ;
enscombe however was gracious , gracious in fact , if not in word .
oh !
have patience with me , i shall soon have done .
“ don’t say i was cross .
a remarkably elegant gown .
no , if he had believed me at all to share his feelings , he would not have been so wretched .
with a deep sigh , that he wished i might find as much happiness in the marriage state as he had done .
it seemed as if every thing united to promise the most interesting consequences .
“ you speak as if you envied him .
and so it has , you see .
“ a material difference then , ” she replied “ and no doubt you were much my superior in judgment at that period of our lives ;
“ but , harriet , is it necessary to burn the court-plaister ?
“ we are going to box hill to-morrow ;
the thing would be for us all to come on donkeys , jane , miss bates , and me and my caro sposo walking by .
i could change my shoes , you know , the moment i got home ;
“ she is not entirely without it , i think .
“ oh !
he had expressed himself as to coming , with more than common certainty .
it is like a woman’s writing .
somebody said that miss gilbert was expected at her brother’s , and must be invited with the rest .
but we gentlemen labourers if we get hold of a word miss fairfax said something about conjecturing .
” and turning again to emma , “ but you must not be expecting such a very fine young man ;
she frequently gave me hints of it .
if i had studied a twelvemonth , i could never have made any thing like it .
“ if you are very kind , ” said he , “ it will be one of the waltzes we danced last night ;
and mr perry , whose name , i dare say , is not unknown to you , does not conceive it would be at all more likely to be useful now .
and , after seeing him , emma thus moralised to herself :
he is a fortunate man indeed !
it was felt as such things must be felt .
can you seriously ask me , harriet , whether i imagined him attached to another woman at the very time that i was tacitly , if not openly encouraging you to give way to your own feelings ?
as long as they lived , no exertions would be necessary , their home might be hers for ever ;
“ very soon , very soon , indeed ;
emma could imagine she saw a touch of the arm at this speech , from his wife .
she had no scruple with regard to him .
i shall not forget to think of you four hours hence ;
i never heard of such a thing .
there they are , henry and john and bella , from one end of the sheet to the other , and any one of them might do for any one of the rest .
her friends evidently thought this good enough for her ;
miss woodhouse , we all know at times what it is to be wearied in spirits .
and emma could breathe .
the lane made a slight bend ;
“ but i have never fixed on june or any other month merely looked forward to the summer in general .
whether i thought her too young :
“ mine was a random guess .
he was here only a quarter of an hour , and in a state of agitation which did not allow the full use even of the time he could stay but that there had been misunderstandings he decidedly said .
and by some accident she was falling overboard .
it is not likely .
let donwell and hartfield lose none of their precious intercourse of friendship and confidence , and her peace would be fully secured .
the mere proposal of going out seemed to make her worse .
i will fetch your greatcoat and open the garden door for you .
“ a new neighbour for us all , miss woodhouse !
she blessed the favouring blindness .
“ ah !
the ladies here probably exchanged looks which meant , “ men never know when things are dirty or not ;
there is nothing like staying at home for real comfort .
i only doubt whether he will ever take us anywhere else .
woman’s usual occupations of hand and mind will be as open to me then as they are now ;
to do what would be most generally pleasing must be our object if one could but tell what that would be .
“ miss woodhouse , ” said frank churchill , after examining a table behind him , which he could reach as he sat , “ have your nephews taken away their alphabets their box of letters ?
mrs weston had set off to pay the visit in a good deal of agitation herself ;
and it will not be very long , i hope , before that becomes the acknowledgment of more than your reason .
very thoughtful of colonel campbell , was not it ?
you have not heard all that you ought to hear .
but how it could all be , was beyond his comprehension .
i never saw any thing so outrée !
it was impossible to say how much he should be gratified by being employed on such an errand .
mr woodhouse had so completely made up his mind to the visit , that in spite of the increasing coldness , he seemed to have no idea of shrinking from it , and set forward at last most punctually with his eldest daughter in his own carriage , with less apparent consciousness of the weather than either of the others ;
and while she is so happy at hartfield , i cannot wish her to be forming any attachment which would be creating such difficulties on poor mr woodhouse’s account .
“ then , my dear isabella , it is the most extraordinary sort of thing in the world , for in general every thing does give you cold .
and miss smith receiving her summons , was with her without delay , and unattended by any alarming young man .
“ well , ” said emma , willing to let it pass “ you want to hear about the wedding ;
but it was not immediately in her power .
she was delighted to see her father look comfortable , and very much pleased with herself for contriving things so well ;
even then , i was not such a fool as not to mean to be reconciled in time ;
and among those , on which she is beyond his reach , it is but too likely , may be this very circumstance of his coming away from them to visit us .
there is no end of the sad consequences of your going to south end .
jane she had a distinct glimpse of , looking extremely ill ;
“ i was very often influenced rightly by you oftener than i would own at the time .
good heaven !
emma dared not attempt any immediate reply .
the post-office has a great charm at one period of our lives .
you are too obliging , my dear miss woodhouse ;
now emma was obliged to think of the pianoforte ;
emma’s sense of right however had decided it ;
was it a musical society ?
and dwelt a good deal upon his being so very good-humoured and obliging .
“ nothing very bad .
i see it in your countenance .
the change had perhaps been somewhat sudden ;
you would not think it to look at him , but he is bilious mr cole is very bilious .
and mr weston had his five minutes share of it ;
of the same age and always knowing her i ought to have been more her friend .
her early attachment to herself was very amiable ;
harriet was soon back again , and the proposal almost immediately made ;
whom did he ever want to consult on business but mr knightley ?
her parting look was grateful and her parting words , “ oh !
she immediately stopped , under pretence of having some alteration to make in the lacing of her half-boot , and stooping down in complete occupation of the footpath , begged them to have the goodness to walk on , and she would follow in half a minute .
of course i have not transcribed beyond the first eight lines .
you have cured her of her school-girl’s giggle ;
i wish i could conjecture how soon i shall make this rivet quite firm .
he had stayed on , however , vigorously , day after day till this very morning’s post had conveyed the history of jane fairfax .
and emma should write a line , and invite her .
and though there was no being attached to the aunt , he acknowledged her kindness with gratitude , and seemed to mean always to speak of her with respect .
she was good enough for mr elton , no doubt ;
perhaps he wanted to speak to her , of his attachment to harriet ;
mrs weston wants to see you .
and as emma became acquainted with robert martin , who was now introduced at hartfield , she fully acknowledged in him all the appearance of sense and worth which could bid fairest for her little friend .
for she said , “ nonsense !
i don’t say that it is not a disagreeable business but things might be much worse .
yet she could not bear this silence .
mrs elton began to think she had been wrong in disclaiming so warmly .
“ when i have seen mr elton , ” replied jane , “ i dare say i shall be interested but i believe it requires that with me .
“ i often feel concern , ” said she , “ that i dare not make our carriage more useful on such occasions .
not like mr elton .
still , however , affection was glad to catch at any reasonable excuse for not hurrying on the wretched moment .
” and in a louder , steadier tone , he concluded with , “ he will soon be gone .
“ whenever the time may come , it must be unwelcome to her and all her friends but i hope her engagement will have every alleviation that is possible i mean , as to the character and manners of the family .
oh !
he had a comfortable home for her , and emma imagined a very sufficient income ;
you never wrote a truer line .
mr dixon does not seem in the least backward in any attention .
a room at an inn was always damp and dangerous ;
you do not often overpower me with it .
but i must work on my father’s compassion , by reminding him , that so long as i absented myself from his house , so long i lost the blessing of knowing you .
perhaps i am the readier to suspect , because , to tell you the truth , i think it might have been some amusement to myself in the same situation .
and mrs elton seemed to think it as much her duty as mrs weston’s to receive them .
you see how delightfully she writes .
and exactly emma’s age .
but there is , i believe , in many men , especially single men , such an inclination such a passion for dining out a dinner engagement is so high in the class of their pleasures , their employments , their dignities , almost their duties , that any thing gives way to it and this must be the case with mr elton ;
whether she had not herself made the first motion , she could not say she might , perhaps , have rather offered it but he took her hand , pressed it , and certainly was on the point of carrying it to his lips when , from some fancy or other , he suddenly let it go .
he became liable to all these charges .
“ you are better placed here ;
mr knightley seemed to be trying not to smile ;
oh , no !
he liked very much to have his friends come and see him ;
if all took place that might take place among the circle of her friends , hartfield must be comparatively deserted ;
and i always thought you meant it .
he asked me if he could do any thing .
he had returned to a late dinner , and walked to hartfield as soon as it was over .
but i would rather be at home , looking over william larkins’s week’s account ;
harriet smiled again , and her smiles grew stronger .
there it goes , and there is an end , thank heaven !
it would only make him hotter .
but they would all be safer at home .
and , under indescribable irritation of spirits , she was then conveyed to hartfield .
he takes things as he finds them , and makes enjoyment of them somehow or other , depending , i suspect , much more upon what is called society for his comforts , that is , upon the power of eating and drinking , and playing whist with his neighbours five times a week , than upon family affection , or any thing that home affords .
mr elton looked as if he did not very well know what answer to make ;
mr and mrs john knightley , from having been longer than usual absent from surry , were exciting of course rather more than the usual interest .
spoken with some anxiety , and meant only for her .
my poor dear child , the truth is , that in london it is always a sickly season .
mrs weston it is too calm a censure .
you may be very sure i shall always take care of them .
“ i am not at all surprized that he should have fallen in love .
he joined them ;
” said frank churchill , as soon as they were out of hearing :
but it was such a look as she thought must restore him to his senses , and then left the sofa , removing to a seat by her sister , and giving her all her attention .
“ but , my dear sir , ” cried mr weston , “ if emma comes away early , it will be breaking up the party .
emma was extremely confused .
i should like to know how many of all my numerous engagements take place without your being of the party ;
jane says she is sure they will ;
he thought she had undertaken more than she was equal to , and that she felt it so herself , though she would not own it .
but still she had declined it !
during his present short stay , emma had barely seen him ;
“ do you think so ?
you wrote me word of it three months ago .
he did really look and speak as if in a state of no common enjoyment .
and the quarter of an hour quite convinced her that mrs elton was a vain woman , extremely well satisfied with herself , and thinking much of her own importance ;
and jane’s offences rose again .
and i must say , that i think him greatly to blame .
how else could they come ?
i am in no hurry .
and when she did speak , it was in a voice nearly as agitated as emma’s .
“ no , no , ” he gravely replied .
she was disgustingly , was suspiciously reserved .
the invitation was refused , and by a verbal message .
when i think of the kindness and favour i have met with , of her excellence and patience , and my uncle’s generosity , i am mad with joy :
wish it she must , for his sake be the consequence nothing to herself , but his remaining single all his life .
anywhere , so that jane is not in a draught .
“ i would ask for the pleasure of your company , mr knightley , but i am a very slow walker , and my pace would be tedious to you ;
“ and i have not forgotten , ” said emma , “ how sure you were that he might have come sooner if he would .
the loss of the ball the loss of the young man and all that the young man might be feeling !
it was all my doing , i know .
smiles of intelligence passed between her and the gentleman on first glancing towards miss fairfax ;
i will send you some more , before they get good for nothing .’ so i begged he would not for really as to ours being gone , i could not absolutely say that we had a great many left it was but half a dozen indeed ;
mrs weston could only approve .
but there were symptoms of intelligence between them he thought so at least symptoms of admiration on his side , which , having once observed , he could not persuade himself to think entirely void of meaning , however he might wish to escape any of emma’s errors of imagination .
but it is not every body who will bestow praise where they may .
when are we to begin dancing ?
do not imagine that i expect an account of miss fairfax’s sensations from you , or from any body else .
“ if he would be so good as to read to them , it would be a kindness indeed !
man’s boasted power and freedom , all are flown ;
were she your equal in situation but , emma , consider how far this is from being the case .
well !
and his wife’s persuading him to it , out of care for his health just what will happen , i have no doubt , some time or other ;
“ dear mrs elton , who can have thought of it as i have done ?
sir , you are most kind .
her ideas only varied as to the how much .
when you have lived to my age , you will begin to think letters are never worth going through the rain for .
the result of his thoughts appeared at last in these words .
how the delicacy , the discretion of his favourite could have been so lain asleep !
“ do not you think , miss woodhouse , our saucy little friend here is charmingly recovered ?
she was vexed beyond what could have been expressed almost beyond what she could conceal .
however , i assure you , miss woodhouse , i wish her no evil .
selina is no fine lady , i assure you .
“ but i dare say he might come if he would .
“ and so she is to come to us next friday or saturday , and the campbells leave town in their way to holyhead the monday following as you will find from jane’s letter .
i saw you first in february .
“ impropriety !
these letters were but the vehicle for gallantry and trick .
“ i have made a most wretched discovery , ” said he , after a short pause .
“ it is a very simple story .
there is something so shocking in a child’s being taken away from his parents and natural home !
impossible !
“ you were mentioning may .
you knew i should not stir till my lord and master appeared .
“ indeed !
dear me !
perhaps get as far as the clover , which was to be begun cutting on the morrow , or , at any rate , have the pleasure of being hot , and growing cool again .
how improperly had she been acting by harriet !
mr cole said how much taste you had ;
i give you notice you will find me a formidable antagonist on that point .
madam , ” cried emma , “ if other children are at all like what i remember to have been myself , i should think five times the amount of what i have ever yet heard named as a salary on such occasions , dearly earned .
harriet’s staying away so long was beginning to make her uneasy .
the visit was of course short ;
he had been sitting with her , it appeared , most companionably at home , till her usual hour of exercise ;
referring the education to her seemed to imply it .
they were a family of the name of martin , whom emma well knew by character , as renting a large farm of mr knightley , and residing in the parish of donwell very creditably , she believed she knew mr knightley thought highly of them but they must be coarse and unpolished , and very unfit to be the intimates of a girl who wanted only a little more knowledge and elegance to be quite perfect .
i shall just go round by mrs cole’s ;
and his voice was the voice of sentiment as he answered .
invite them both .
“ you are a humourist , and may say what you like .
and it would be safer for both , to have the judicious law of her own brain laid down with speed .
a few awkward moments passed , and he sat down again ;
you are so much used to live alone , that you do not know the value of a companion ;
mrs weston , did you ever hear the like ?
i have not forgotten it , i assure you .
mr woodhouse , who had already taken his little round in the highest part of the gardens , where no damps from the river were imagined even by him , stirred no more ;
but the sight of mr knightley among the most attentive , soon drew away half emma’s mind ;
that he is well-grown and good-looking , with smooth , plausible manners .
it is impossible to refuse what you ask in such a way .
how could it be ?
she tried to stop him ;
harriet’s parentage became known .
i met one as i came madness in such weather !
she had never boasted either beauty or cleverness .
“ well if you advise it .
i am always watching her to admire ;
i never could have supposed it .
you may be very sure that if i had , i should have cautioned you accordingly .
and on being desired to chuse their walk , immediately fixed on highbury .
not handsome not at all handsome .
but the girl who could be gratified by a robert martin’s riding about the country to get walnuts for her might very well be conquered by mr elton’s admiration .
perfectly .
now , here will be mr elton and miss hawkins ;
these were pleasant feelings , and she walked about and indulged them till it was necessary to do as the others did , and collect round the strawberry-beds .
what do you advise ?
pray , pray attempt it .
she had ventured once alone to randalls , but it was not pleasant ;
and all the smiles and the proprieties passed .
but “ she could never get acquainted with her :
“ better than she ever used to do ?
“ she could not compose herself mr woodhouse would be alarmed she had better go ;
resentment could not have been more plainly spoken than in a civility to her father , from which she was so pointedly excluded .
a private dance , without sitting down to supper , was pronounced an infamous fraud upon the rights of men and women ;
“ what news do you mean ?
we are so very airy !
they seemed to be within half a sentence of harriet , and her immediate feeling was to avert the subject , if possible .
and for me to be afraid of walking alone !
c .
however , she is very agreeable , and mrs bates too , in a different way .
“ when i talked of your being altered by time , by the progress of years , ” said john knightley , “ i meant to imply the change of situation which time usually brings .
“ my emma , he means no such thing .
i felt for your dear father very much in the storm of tuesday afternoon and yesterday morning , but had the comfort of hearing last night , by mr perry , that it had not made him ill .
it was not closed , however , it still remained ajar ;
in short , i can feel no dependence on his coming , and i wish mr weston were less sanguine .
i never was equal to this .
but you have your sister’s letter , and every thing is down at full length there we may be sure .
i always say a woman cannot have too many resources and i feel very thankful that i have so many myself as to be quite independent of society .
emma waited the result with impatience , but not without strong hopes .
oh yes !
but you will be ready to say , what was your hope in doing this ?
i have no doubt .
“ well , well , means to make her an offer then .
“ such an eye !
but now , it is clear ;
for , though the child seemed well now , very well considering , it would probably have been better if perry had seen it .
now , however , i see nothing in it but a very natural and consistent degree of discretion .
and though she is amazingly fortunate such a situation , i suppose , as no young woman before ever met with on first going out do not think us ungrateful , miss woodhouse , for such surprising good fortune (again dispersing her tears) but , poor dear soul !
isabella then went to emma ;
every thing has turned out exactly as we could wish .
here have i been sitting this hour , giving these young ladies a sample of true conjugal obedience for who can say , you know , how soon it may be wanted ?
and all the grandeur of the connexion seemed dependent on the elder sister , who was very well married , to a gentleman in a great way , near bristol , who kept two carriages !
she has refused him , and so decidedly , i think , as must prevent any second application .
and till she is in being , i will manage such matters myself .
“ i am persuaded that you can be as insincere as your neighbours , when it is necessary ;
but it must have been .
perry’s setting up his carriage !
“ and when , ” thought emma , “ will there be a beginning of mr churchill ?
there was a communication before her , one which she only could be competent to make the confession of her engagement to her father ;
it is only mrs cole ,’ said i , depend upon it .
i have been making discoveries and forming plans , just like yourself , and i must tell them while the idea is fresh .
the danger would have been of my wearying you .
she is a standing lesson of how to be happy .
and that highbury , instead of welcoming that perfect novelty which had been so long promised it mr frank churchill must put up for the present with jane fairfax , who could bring only the freshness of a two years’ absence .
i congratulate you , my dear harriet , with all my heart .
i shall do something to expose myself .
you make the best of it but after you have been a week at hartfield , you are all of you different creatures ;
mrs bates was engaged to spend the evening at hartfield , james had due notice , and he sanguinely hoped that neither dear little henry nor dear little john would have any thing the matter with them , while dear emma were gone .
frank churchill turned towards her to listen .
very glad , i am sure ;
i assured him that i could not .
they sat down to tea the same party round the same table how often it had been collected !
i am losing all my bitterness against spoilt children , my dearest emma .
a ready-furnished house in a favourite spot was engaged , and much benefit expected from the change .
she will never lead any one really wrong ;
there she sat and who would have guessed how many tears she had been lately shedding ?
mrs churchill rules at enscombe , and is a very odd-tempered woman ;
my mother will be so very happy to see her and now we are such a nice party , she cannot refuse .
for though very much gratified by the kind care of such a fair lady , and not liking to resist any advice of her’s , he had not really the least inclination to give up the visit ;
“ very likely .
were not you struck ?
or with no important variation .
emma and harriet were going to walk ;
“ she must be under some sort of penance , inflicted either by the campbells or herself .
the difference of harriet at mrs goddard’s , or in london , made perhaps an unreasonable difference in emma’s sensations ;
“ i agree with you exactly .
i must order the carriage .
if you were to see what a headache she has .
i shall be no support to mrs weston .
no doubt he is a sensible man , and i suppose may have a natural talent for thinks strongly and clearly and when he takes a pen in hand , his thoughts naturally find proper words .
mr elton was to take the drawing to london , chuse the frame , and give the directions ;
but really , i could almost venture , if harriet would sit to me .
how long had mr knightley been so dear to her , as every feeling declared him now to be ?
a very proper compliment !
“ well and and what shall i do ?
he began to suspect him of some double dealing in his pursuit of emma .
“ but will there be good room for five couple ?
but without the most distant imagination of the impending evil , without the slightest perception of any thing extraordinary in the looks or ways of either , he repeated to them very comfortably all the articles of news he had received from mr perry , and talked on with much self-contentment , totally unsuspicious of what they could have told him in return .
“ another day would do as well ;
however , my resolution is taken as to noticing jane fairfax .
he left me not half an hour ago .
a long time , is not it , for a cold to hang upon her ?
he rode down for a couple of hours ;
and soon , with what appeared unusual speed , they were half way down the hill , and every thing left far behind .
but now , she would rather it had not happened .
he must have a pretty good opinion of himself .
he proved to me that he could afford it ;
“ it is very pretty , ” said mr woodhouse .
were you often in the same society ?
” cried emma , after a moment’s pause “ what do you mean ?
i am lady patroness , you know .
days almost at the longest ;
i want to see you permanently well connected , and to that end it will be advisable to have as few odd acquaintance as may be ;
isabella stept in after her father ;
she asked after their mutual friends ;
“ there were misunderstandings between them , emma ;
but i will not delay you by a long preface .
mr elton being the adoration of all the teachers and great girls in the school ;
it was an awkward ceremony at any time to be receiving wedding visits , and a man had need be all grace to acquit himself well through it .
it was a wretched business indeed !
you appeared tired the whole time .
there was little sympathy to be spared for any body else .
he shook his head with a smile , and looked as if he had very little doubt and very little mercy .
“ that is the case with us all , papa .
he remained at hartfield after all the rest , his thoughts full of what he had seen ;
one can see that she feels the want of encouragement .
let us have patience .
harriet undoubtedly was greatly his inferior in understanding ;
i never saw such a likeness in my life .
it supplied a very useful check , interested , without disturbing him .
oh yes , friday or saturday next .
she could not endure to give him the true explanation ;
if meant to be immediately mixed with the others , and buried from sight , she should have looked on the table instead of looking just across , for it was not mixed ;
and it becomes a matter , therefore , of very serious inconvenience that i should have had this hot walk to no purpose .
he could be sure of little else .
it appears to me a most perfect resemblance in every feature .
it has hurt his father equally .
harriet , necessarily drawn away by her engagements with the martins , was less and less at hartfield ;
now , as we may fairly suppose , he would not allow much time to pass before he spoke to the lady , and as he does not appear to have spoken yesterday , it is not unlikely that he should be at mrs goddard’s to-day ;
if i could but play as well as you and miss fairfax !
she would wait and , sure enough , yesterday evening it was all settled that jane should go .
she had been in a very suffering state (so said her husband) when writing to her nephew two days before , though from her usual unwillingness to give pain , and constant habit of never thinking of herself , she had not mentioned it ;
it was a sad change .
it was soon gone to brunswick square or to donwell ;
her regard was receiving strength by invariable praise of him , and her regrets kept alive , and feelings irritated by ceaseless repetitions of miss hawkins’s happiness , and continual observation of , how much he seemed attached !
if they must dance , they had better dance at randalls .
such might be his constitution ;
and mr frank churchill talked a great deal about your taste , and that he valued taste much more than execution .
in so large a party it was not necessary that emma should approach her .
he did not boast , but it naturally betrayed itself , that he had persuaded his aunt where his uncle could do nothing , and on her laughing and noticing it , he owned that he believed (excepting one or two points) he could with time persuade her to any thing .
very unaccountable !
“ i did not mean , i was not thinking of the slave-trade , ” replied jane ;
” replied miss bates .
something of that nature would be particularly desirable for me , as an inducement to keep me in practice ;
mrs weston’s friends were all made happy by her safety ;
“ ah !
nobody but yourself could imagine such a thing possible .
he perfectly agreed with her :
i will invite your guests .
“ is miss woodhouse sure that she would like to hear what we are all thinking of ?
but the ways of hartfield and the feelings of her father were so respected by mrs john knightley , that in spite of maternal solicitude for the immediate enjoyment of her little ones , and for their having instantly all the liberty and attendance , all the eating and drinking , and sleeping and playing , which they could possibly wish for , without the smallest delay , the children were never allowed to be long a disturbance to him , either in themselves or in any restless attendance on them .
“ oh !
“ something has happened to delay her ;
and at eighteen or nineteen she was , as far as such an early age can be qualified for the care of children , fully competent to the office of instruction herself ;
the conviction was strengthened by what followed .
the attachment of frank churchill and jane fairfax became commonplace , threadbare , stale in the comparison , exciting no surprize , presenting no disparity , affording nothing to be said or thought .
but she could not think of her in london without objects of curiosity and employment , which must be averting the past , and carrying her out of herself .
but as to my letting her marry robert martin , it is impossible ;
i like her the better for it .
two or three more of the chosen only were to be admitted to join them , and it was to be done in a quiet , unpretending , elegant way , infinitely superior to the bustle and preparation , the regular eating and drinking , and picnic parade of the eltons and the sucklings .
but i am quite in the minority , i believe ;
one is so fenced and guarded from the weather , that not a breath of air can find its way unpermitted .
was not it delightful ?
at least , that i should ever bore people half so much about all the knightleys together , as she does about jane fairfax .
“ yes , ” said mr john knightley presently , with some slyness , “ he seems to have a great deal of good-will towards you .
he sat really lost in thought for the first few minutes ;
it was rather too late in the day to set about being simple-minded and ignorant ;
miss nash had told her all this , and had talked a great deal more about mr elton ;
all this ran so glibly through her thoughts , that by the time her father had arranged himself , after the bustle of the eltons’ departure , and was ready to speak , she was very tolerably capable of attending .
the pain of his continued residence in highbury , however , must certainly be lessened by his marriage .
you will find some friends here .
“ yes ;
and neither emma nor the gentlemen could tolerate the prospect of being miserably crowded at supper .
do not we often talk of mr frank churchill ?
“ have you indeed no idea ?
she had begun by refusing to hear him .
south end is prohibited , if you please .
so she ran on directly , as fast as she could , and took shelter at ford’s .
she was now in an exquisite flutter of happiness , and such happiness moreover as she believed must still be greater when the flutter should have passed away .
he may be sure of every woman’s approbation while he writes with such gallantry .
“ six years hence !
but , perhaps i may be equally in the way here .
he gave his consent with very little persuasion .
“ i am quite sure , ” he replied , speaking very distinctly , “ that he told me she had accepted him ;
such a partner in all those duties and cares to which time must be giving increase of melancholy !
and , perhaps , when we come to talk it over but these sort of things require a good deal of consideration .
“ perhaps you think i am come on purpose to quarrel with you , knowing weston to be out , and that you must still fight your own battle .
she felt immediately that she should like him ;
emma could not deplore her future absence as any deduction from her own enjoyment .
i shall go home in the cool of the evening .
“ i certainly will come .
lord of the earth and sea , he bends a slave , and woman , lovely woman , reigns alone .
“ emma , ” said mr knightley presently , “ i have a piece of news for you .
when one is in great pain , you know one cannot feel any blessing quite as it may deserve .
the evil of the actual disparity in their ages (and mr woodhouse had not married early) was much increased by his constitution and habits ;
harriet , here comes a very sudden trial of our stability in good thoughts .
i assure you i have no doubt of its doing mr woodhouse good .
no rencontre , no alarm of the kind ;
she was always having a glimpse of him somewhere or other .
emma assured her there would be no difficulty in the answer , and advised its being written directly , which was agreed to , in the hope of her assistance ;
mr woodhouse talked over his alarms , and emma was in spirits to persuade them away with all her usual promptitude .
my friend knightley’ had been so often mentioned , that i was really impatient to see him ;
“ you will excuse my being so much over-powered .
their friendship must change into a calmer sort of goodwill ;
“ that is to say , you chose to have your walk , for you were not six yards from your own door when i had the pleasure of meeting you ;
and for five couple there will be plenty of room .
after a good many compliments to jane on her dress and look , compliments very quietly and properly taken , mrs elton was evidently wanting to be complimented herself and it was , “ how do you like my gown ?
he felt the going away almost too much to speak of it .
she was sure he would not and she was expecting him every moment to escape into the card-room .
there will be enough for every hope and every fear ;
every body is so surprized ;
their luxury and ease .
some portion of respect for herself , however , in spite of all these demerits some concern for her own appearance , and a strong sense of justice by harriet (there would be no need of compassion to the girl who believed herself loved by mr knightley but justice required that she should not be made unhappy by any coldness now ,) gave emma the resolution to sit and endure farther with calmness , with even apparent kindness .
so afraid you might have a headache !
“ my dear , how am i to get so far ?
they should lose her ;
i am not afraid of your not being exceedingly comfortable with mrs goddard .
but really miss fairfax has done her hair in so odd a way so very odd a way that i cannot keep my eyes from her .
she must have delighted the coles worthy people , who deserved to be made happy !
“ pray do .
not a speck on them .
the pains i have been at to dispel those gloomy ideas and give him cheerfuller views !
they should take care of their health and their complexion .
that he had not been acting a part , or making a parade of insincere professions ;
indeed i must say that , much as i had heard of him before and much as i had expected , he very far exceeds any thing .
in the building in which n .
his company so sought after , that every body says he need not eat a single meal by himself if he does not chuse it ;
and though emma continued to protest against any assistance being wanted , it was in fact given in the formation of every sentence .
when we first began to talk of her .
she was always quick and assured :
she was very fond of singing .
mrs weston undertakes to direct the whole .
” she thought he neither looked nor spoke cheerfully ;
they walked together .
she was quite convinced of mr elton’s being in the fairest way of falling in love , if not in love already .
emma smiled and answered “ my visit was of use to the nervous part of her complaint , i hope ;
he did not come till miss fairfax was here .
emma was extremely glad to see him but there was a degree of confusion a number of embarrassing recollections on each side .
miss woodhouse and miss smith ;
i never could have an idea of any body else and so i thought you knew .
“ he told me at parting , that he should soon write ;
if you think me in a way to be happier than i deserve , i am quite of your opinion .
here is the charade you were so obliging as to leave with us ;
“ we thought you were to bring them .
i do not believe i did you any good .
but you were receiving a very good education from her , on the very material matrimonial point of submitting your own will , and doing as you were bid ;
mr frank churchill was one of the boasts of highbury , and a lively curiosity to see him prevailed , though the compliment was so little returned that he had never been there in his life .
we shall know more about them all , in half an hour , from you , than miss fairfax would have vouchsafed in half a year .
“ and such weather for exploring !
emma accepted it with a very eager hand , with an impatience all alive to know what he would say about it , and not at all checked by hearing that her friend was unmentioned .
he ought not to have formed the engagement .
by which means hartfield would receive the constant addition of that person’s company whom she knew he loved , next to his daughters and mrs weston , best in the world .
” cried harriet indignantly .
now there is nothing grandmama loves better than sweetbread and asparagus so she was rather disappointed , but we agreed we would not speak of it to any body , for fear of its getting round to dear miss woodhouse , who would be so very much concerned !
it was in plain , unaffected , gentlemanlike english , such as mr knightley used even to the woman he was in love with , how to be able to ask her to marry him , without attacking the happiness of her father .
but hush !
with great indignation did he continue to observe him ;
it might be weeks , it might be only a few days , before the horse were useable ;
” “ did he appear a sensible young man ;
“ i am very sorry to hear , miss fairfax , of your being out this morning in the rain .
do as you please .
“ leave it to me .
the boy had , with the additional softening claim of a lingering illness of his mother’s , been the means of a sort of reconciliation ;
the news was universally a surprize wherever it spread ;
she was rather low all the evening , but emma could allow for her amiable regrets , and sometimes relieved them by speaking of her own affection , sometimes by bringing forward the idea of mr elton .
but he had been very much struck with the loveliness of her face and the warm simplicity of her manner ;
i can suppose , however , that i may have underrated him .
and i do not know what about , except that you were too late for the best strawberries .
though i think he had better not have married .
this little explanation with mr knightley gave emma considerable pleasure .
and if poor little anna weston is to be spoiled , it will be the greatest humanity in you to do as much for her as you have done for me , except falling in love with her when she is thirteen .
thought emma but what has all that to do with taking likenesses ?
however , the very same evening william larkins came over with a large basket of apples , the same sort of apples , a bushel at least , and i was very much obliged , and went down and spoke to william larkins and said every thing , as you may suppose .
mr elton certainly did not very well know what to say .
we all feel the influence of a something beyond common civility in our personal intercourse with each other a something more early implanted .
“ you may say what you chuse but your countenance testifies that your thoughts on this subject are very much like mine .
“ i should not wonder , ” said mrs weston , “ if miss fairfax were to have been drawn on beyond her own inclination , by her aunt’s eagerness in accepting mrs elton’s civilities for her .
“ one can get near every body , and say every thing .
but nothing now remained of it , save the melancholy remembrance of him dying in action abroad of his widow sinking under consumption and grief soon afterwards and this girl .
it is on her account that attention to randalls is doubly due , and she must doubly feel the omission .
there will not be time for any thing .
i have heard him express himself so warmly on those points !
emma could not suppose any such thing , knowing as she did , that both the mr knightleys were as unpersuadable on that article as herself ;
my dear harriet , what do you mean ?
“ donwell !
she went on herself , to give that portion of time to an old servant who was married , and settled in donwell .
she never had been so depressed .
miss woodhouse appeared more than once , and never without a something of pleasing connexion , either a compliment to her taste , or a remembrance of what she had said ;
but he is not the only gentleman you have been lately used to .
the “ how d’ye do’s ” were quiet and constrained on each side .
mrs weston was in distress about the supper ;
the heat even would be danger .
for with all his good and agreeable qualities , there was a sort of parade in his speeches which was very apt to incline her to laugh .
yes .
when she was half-way up the set , the whole group were exactly behind her , and she would no longer allow her eyes to watch ;
they only give a little polish .
do not you begin to feel that now ?
i always make a point of reading jane’s letters through to myself first , before i read them aloud to my mother , you know , for fear of there being any thing in them to distress her .
and now emma was obliged to overhear what mrs elton and jane fairfax were talking of .
so cold and artificial !
and jane fairfax was still at her grandmother’s ;
, you have not been to donwell !
“ yes , sometimes he can .
i must love him ;
she got her to hartfield , and shewed her the most unvarying kindness , striving to occupy and amuse her , and by books and conversation , to drive mr elton from her thoughts .
“ no , indeed , ” cried emma , most happy to begin , “ not in the least .
such an end of the doleful disappointment of five weeks back !
.
“ how often , when you were a girl , have you said to me , with one of your saucy looks mr knightley , i am going to do so-and-so ;
i am going this moment myself ;
at the same time , i will not positively answer for my having never dropt a hint , because i know i do sometimes pop out a thing before i am aware .
he had told harriet that he had seen them go by , and had purposely followed them ;
i hope they are quite well .
and the enmity which they dared not shew in open disrespect to her , found a broader vent in contemptuous treatment of harriet .
it was hot ;
and a few weeks spent in london must give her some amusement .
“ harriet !
and so , when mr elton came back , he told us what john ostler had been telling him , and then it came out about the chaise having been sent to randalls to take mr frank churchill to richmond .
he knew miss fairfax could have no music here .
but stopped , on perceiving that mrs weston was attending to some one else and the pause gave her time to reflect , “ now , how am i going to introduce him ?
when the campbells are returned , we shall meet them in london , and continue there , i trust , till we may carry her northward .
and though my attachment to none can equal that of a parent , it suits my ideas of comfort better than what is warmer and blinder .
they seem not able to do any thing without him .
they were all three soon in the hall , and harriet immediately sinking into a chair fainted away .
sometimes mr elton predominated , sometimes the martins ;
put it up , put it up ;
the symptoms were favourable .
no , now i recollect , now i have it ;
she understood it all ;
what could be increasing emma’s wretchedness but the reflection never far distant from her mind , that it had been all her own work ?
my mother desires her very best compliments and regards , and a thousand thanks , and says you really quite oppress her .
in general , it was a very well approved match .
only think of those sweet verses to miss .’ dear me , how clever !
it was growing late , and miss bates became anxious to get home , on her mother’s account .
if the westons think it worth while to be at all this trouble for a few hours of noisy entertainment , i have nothing to say against it , but that they shall not chuse pleasures for me .
ma’am , ” addressing her , “ do you hear what miss woodhouse is so obliging to say about jane’s handwriting ?
she stopped to breathe .
“ this is coming as you should do , ” said she ;
this was very proper ;
and during the ten days of their stay at hartfield it was not to be expected she did not herself expect that any thing beyond occasional , fortuitous assistance could be afforded by her to the lovers .
i must confess it is a recommendation to me .
but i have been forgiven by one who had still more to resent .
he had received a good education , but , on succeeding early in life to a small independence , had become indisposed for any of the more homely pursuits in which his brothers were engaged , and had satisfied an active , cheerful mind and social temper by entering into the militia of his county , then embodied .
i only want to know that mr martin is not very , very bitterly disappointed .
where is your merit ?
i have heard him speak with great animation of a large family of young ladies that his sisters are intimate with , who have all twenty thousand pounds apiece .
after emma had talked about it for ten minutes , mr woodhouse felt no unwillingness , and only made the usual stipulation of not sitting at the bottom of the table himself , with the usual regular difficulty of deciding who should do it for him .
just like her !
and when she stoops to be disagreeable , it is equally to be recommended as a clearer of ill-fame .
“ as soon as my aunt gets well , i shall go abroad , ” said he .
a lady always does .
i had not thought of it before , but that is the best way .
and after raving a little about the seeming incongruity of gentle manners and a conceited head , emma was obliged in common honesty to stop and admit that her own behaviour to him had been so complaisant and obliging , so full of courtesy and attention , as (supposing her real motive unperceived) might warrant a man of ordinary observation and delicacy , like mr elton , in fancying himself a very decided favourite .
but their straightforward emotions left no room for the little zigzags of embarrassment .
jane has heard a great deal of its beauty ;
it is my party .
at her age she can have no experience , and with her little wit , is not very likely ever to have any that can avail her .
you are extremely obliging and if i were not an old married man .
she believed every body found his manners pleasing .
till a little bustle in the room shewed them that tea was over , and the instrument in preparation ;
the event acquitted her of all the fancifulness , and all the selfishness of imaginary complaints .
i saw all the three ladies ;
“ poor girl !
“ no , ” replied emma quite confirmed by the depressed manner in which he still spoke “ i should like to take another turn .
and , in the course of their drive , mrs weston had , by gentle encouragement , overcome so much of her embarrassment , as to bring her to converse on the important subject .
and , therefore , it seems as if such a thing even as this , may have occurred before and if i should be so fortunate , beyond expression , as to if mr knightley should really if he does not mind the disparity , i hope , dear miss woodhouse , you will not set yourself against it , and try to put difficulties in the way .
it was very natural for you to say , what right has he to lecture me ?
“ and how could she bear such behaviour !
i should not attempt it , if it were to be the means of inconvenience to the highbury people , but if you call to mind exactly the present line of the path .
he would find abundance of every thing in the dining-room and she humanely pointed out the door .
he was very much pleased with randalls , thought it a most admirably arranged house , would hardly allow it even to be very small , admired the situation , the walk to highbury , highbury itself , hartfield still more , and professed himself to have always felt the sort of interest in the country which none but one’s own country gives , and the greatest curiosity to visit it .
you sad girl , how could you do such a thing ?
“ has he so !
“ and cannot you call me george’ now ?
i hope you are quite well .
here are we setting forward to spend five dull hours in another man’s house , with nothing to say or to hear that was not said and heard yesterday , and may not be said and heard again to-morrow .
for after all my pains , and when i had really made a very good likeness of it (mrs weston and i were quite agreed in thinking it very like) only too handsome too flattering but that was a fault on the right side ” after all this , came poor dear isabella’s cold approbation of “ yes , it was a little like but to be sure it did not do him justice .
quite delightful ;
well , sir , the time must come when you will be paid for all this , when you will have little labour and great enjoyment .
” she cried .
could it be ?
“ yes , ” replied harriet modestly , but not fearfully “ i must say that i have .
and highbury has long known that you are a superior performer .
how very beautiful !
it was but an effusion of lively spirits .
“ thank you , sir , thank you ;
very extraordinary !
jane looked as if she did not mean to be conquered ;
and having warmly protested against her suspicion as most injurious , and slightly touched upon his respect for miss smith as her friend , but acknowledging his wonder that miss smith should be mentioned at all , he resumed the subject of his own passion , and was very urgent for a favourable answer .
she was sensible of all the affection it evinced .
and jane remained with them , sharing , as another daughter , in all the rational pleasures of an elegant society , and a judicious mixture of home and amusement , with only the drawback of the future , the sobering suggestions of her own good understanding to remind her that all this might soon be over .
“ jane fairfax !
these were claims which he did not learn to overlook , though some years passed away from the death of poor fairfax , before his own return to england put any thing in his power .
mr woodhouse could not be soon reconciled ;
“ why , really , dear emma , i say that he is so very much occupied by the idea of not being in love with her , that i should not wonder if it were to end in his being so at last .
“ no , indeed we are not at all in a bad air .
or were left as mere trifles to be settled at any time between mrs weston and mrs stokes .
compare their manner of carrying themselves ;
but why so ?
i did not make the allowances ,’ said she , which i ought to have done , for his temper and spirits his delightful spirits , and that gaiety , that playfulness of disposition , which , under any other circumstances , would , i am sure , have been as constantly bewitching to me , as they were at first .’ she then began to speak of you , and of the great kindness you had shewn her during her illness ;
she was just as determined when the morrow came , and went early , that nothing might prevent her .
or thereabouts ;
and has not mrs weston some inimitable figure-pieces in her drawing-room , at randalls ?
mr wingfield told me that he has never known them more general or heavy except when it has been quite an influenza .
emma watched and decided , that with such feelings as were now shewn , it could not be fairly supposed that he had been ever voluntarily absenting himself ;
with all the eagerness which such a transition gives , emma resolved to be out of doors as soon as possible .
and secretly she added to herself , “ lord bless me !
that frank churchill thought less of her than he had done , was indubitable .
i went in for three minutes , and was detained by miss bates’s being absent .
i had not the least idea !
his dancing proved to be just what she had believed it , extremely good ;
do not pity me till i saw her wan , sick looks .
she would not be ashamed of the appearance of the penitence , so justly and truly hers .
one good thing was immediately brought to a certainty by this removal , the ball at the crown .
do you recommend this side ?
emma saw mrs weston’s surprize , and felt that it must be great , at an address which , in words and manner , was assuming to himself the right of first interest in her ;
james and his horses seemed not half so sluggish as before .
they were all well .
” said he , turning his eyes towards jane .
she even wept over the idea of it , as a sin of thought .
have you quite forgotten ?
“ and then their uncle comes in , and tosses them up to the ceiling in a very frightful way !
but the plan which had arisen on the sacrifice of this , he trusted his dearest emma would not find in any respect objectionable ;
i know mr john knightley too well i am very sure he understands the value of friendship as well as any body .
it was a commission to touch every favourite feeling .
if frank churchill had wanted to see his father , he would have contrived it between september and january .
“ it is as long again as almost all we have had before .
i shall leave off while i am well .
jane came back delighted yesterday .
how much more must an imaginist , like herself , be on fire with speculation and foresight !
and i do not wish to see any such person .
you cannot mean to say , that harriet smith has accepted robert martin .
how inconsiderate , how indelicate , how irrational , how unfeeling had been her conduct !
he feared there must be some decided involvement .
she had never been quite well since the time of their daughter’s marriage ;
you know , my dear , she is going to be to this new lady what miss taylor was to us .
if they are not put off , he cannot stir .
a few minutes were sufficient for making her acquainted with her own heart .
he has had great faults , faults of inconsideration and thoughtlessness ;
he caught her .
” said he to emma , and trying , as he spoke , to catch miss fairfax’s eye .
such another scheme , composed of so many ill-assorted people , she hoped never to be betrayed into again .
the young man’s conduct , and his sister’s , seemed the result of real feeling , and she could not but pity them .
perhaps hardly so great .
the hours were to be early , as well as the numbers few ;
harriet was too much agitated to encounter him .
and yet i am no advocate for entire seclusion .
and it was with difficulty that she could summon enough of her usual self to be the attentive lady of the house , or even the attentive daughter .
“ why , to be sure , ” said mr woodhouse “ yes , certainly i cannot deny that mrs weston , poor mrs weston , does come and see us pretty often but then she is always obliged to go away again .
this is a point which you must settle with your feelings .
mrs weston and her son-in-law ;
i know what you mean but emma’s hand is the strongest .
you forget yourself you take me for my friend any message to miss smith i shall be happy to deliver ;
harriet was most happy to give every particular of the evening at astley’s , and the dinner the next day ;
a better written letter , harriet (returning it ,) than i had expected .
for mrs weston was the most used of the two to yield ;
we must consider what miss fairfax quits , before we condemn her taste for what she goes to .
my dear sir , her throat is so much better that i have hardly any uneasiness about it .
as for isabella , she has been married long enough to see the convenience of putting all the mr westons aside as much as she can .
she appeared to me to play well , that is , with considerable taste , but i know nothing of the matter myself .
were all extremely amused ;
and that is all that i can recollect of it but it is very clever all the way through .
and i do not think i ever shall .
i am not in want of that sort of compassion .
but i made excuses for her , and was too busy , and may i add ?
“ indeed i will .
to give up one’s child !
there are places in town , offices , where inquiry would soon produce something offices for the sale not quite of human flesh but of human intellect .
and dear emma , too !
she was , in fact , beginning very much to wonder that she had ever thought him pleasing at all ;
mr knightley had another reason for avoiding a table in the shade .
if hungry , that she would take something to eat ;
who could have seen through such thick-headed nonsense ?
“ he is very obliging , ” said emma ;
in spite of the answer , therefore , she ordered the carriage , and drove to mrs bates’s , in the hope that jane would be induced to join her but it would not do ;
quick and decided in her ways , emma lost no time in inviting , encouraging , and telling her to come very often ;
upon my word , this is charming to be standing about among such friends !
she said no more , other subjects took their turn ;
what is passable in youth is detestable in later age .
her comprehension was certainly more equal to the covert meaning , the superior intelligence , of those five letters so arranged .
you will be glad to hear (inclining his head , and whispering seriously) that my uncle means to give her all my aunt’s jewels .
where would be the use of his bringing us a charade made by a friend upon a mermaid or a shark ?
proud , assuming , conceited ;
he has been opening the doors very often this evening , and keeping them open very inconsiderately .
harriet , who was standing at some distance , and with face turned from her , did not immediately say any thing ;
john loves emma with a reasonable and therefore not a blind affection , and isabella always thinks as he does ;
but he always had been such a very kind neighbour !’ and then fly off , through half a sentence , to her mother’s old petticoat .
there , with spirits freshened , and thoughts a little relieved , she had taken a few turns , when she saw mr knightley passing through the garden door , and coming towards her .
knightley !
so you would all .
why not your honour !
“ yes , all of us ;
his tall , firm , upright figure , among the bulky forms and stooping shoulders of the elderly men , was such as emma felt must draw every body’s eyes ;
you might not have distinguished how i came , by my look or manner .
“ i am afraid we must be running away , ” said emma , glancing at harriet , and beginning to rise “ my father will be expecting us .
she need no longer be unhappy about jane , whose troubles and whose ill-health having , of course , the same origin , must be equally under cure .
there , it is done .
i have heard so much in praise of mr frank churchill .
i am not in the least ashamed of my meaning .
one cannot help getting on faster than one has planned ;
“ i shall soon bring him over to hartfield , ” said he , at the conclusion .
they parted thorough friends , however ;
witness this very time .
there was no bearing such an “ always ;
“ no i cannot call them gifts ;
we never see any thing of it on our club-nights .
my aunt always sends me off when she is shopping .
“ well !
and emma received a smile which seemed to say , “ these are my own concerns .
she could not enter the house again , could not be in the same room to which she had with such vain artifice retreated three months ago , to lace up her boot , without recollecting .
nobody is healthy in london , nobody can be .
harriet submitted , and approved , and was grateful .
and i do not know a properer person for shewing us how to do away difficulties .
he must be gone within a few hours , though without feeling any real alarm for his aunt , to lessen his repugnance .
emma must do harriet good :
“ oh !
how do you like it ?
she will tell me every thing .
it soon appeared that he came to announce an improvement .
i am sure they will like her extremely ;
surprizes are foolish things .
think less , talk less of mr elton for my sake ;
do you imagine it to be the consequence of an immediate commission from him , or that he may have sent only a general direction , an order indefinite as to time , to depend upon contingencies and conveniences ?
i wanted to know a little more , and this tells me quite enough .
“ jane , jane , my dear jane , where are you ?
perhaps she ought to be ashamed , but mr weston had been almost as uneasy as herself .
and miss woodhouse’s doing it would be more thought of than any other person’s in the room .
you must think one five hundred million times more above me than the other .
indeed they are very delightful apples , and mrs wallis does them full justice only we do not have them baked more than twice , and mr woodhouse made us promise to have them done three times but miss woodhouse will be so good as not to mention it .
they have no indoors man , else they do not want for any thing ;
“ oh !
“ i know that you all love her really too well to be unjust or unkind ;
i felt that , as to fortune , in all probability he might do much better ;
mr martin may be the richest of the two , but he is undoubtedly her inferior as to rank in society .
was delicate in her own health , over-careful of that of her children , had many fears and many nerves , and was as fond of her own mr wingfield in town as her father could be of mr perry .
“ harriet !
“ ah , my dear , ” said he , “ poor miss taylor it is a grievous business .
she spoke then , on being so entreated .
they could go there again with them in the autumn .
he had been most agreeable , most delightful ;
no objection was raised on the father’s side ;
i can say nothing less , for i suppose miss woodhouse and mr frank churchill are hearing every thing that passes .
yes , believe me , knightley , i am fully sensible of your attention to me in the whole of this scheme .
dear mrs elton , so obliged to you for the carriage !
he did not suppose they could be damp now , in the middle of the day .
i have done very little .
mrs weston had been delighted before , and was delighted again ;
“ yes , ” said harriet earnestly , “ and well she might , nobody could ever have a better .
she is known only as parlour-boarder at a common school .
quite delightful to have you all meet so !
the evening of this day was very long , and melancholy , at hartfield .
“ i said it would be so , ” was the only consolation .
i wish jane fairfax very well ;
“ will you be so kind , ” said she , “ when i am missed , as to say that i am gone home ?
they were permitted to go alone ;
oh !
harriet smith marries robert martin .
“ well , my dear , ” said he , as they entered the room “ i have brought her , and now i hope you will soon be better .
he contrived that she should be seated by him ;
i had no hesitation in advising him to marry .
at any rate , it must be better to have only one to please than two .
and , by the bye , i wonder how mrs elton bears the disappointment ?
to look on , while repeated attentions were offering to another woman , before her face , and not resent it .
your friend harriet will make a much longer history when you see her .
the good sense of colonel and mrs campbell could not oppose such a resolution , though their feelings did .
it was a more pressing concern to shew attention to jane fairfax , whose prospects were closing , while harriet’s opened , and whose engagements now allowed of no delay in any one at highbury , who wished to shew her kindness and with emma it was grown into a first wish .
and where are the poor horses to be while we are paying our visit ?
mr elton’s situation was most suitable , quite the gentleman himself , and without low connexions ;
but i cannot stay to hear it .
i speak as a friend , emma .
“ you had better go on , ” said she .
dear , no , ” said her companion .
could the event of the disclosure bear an equal resemblance !
i am quite ready .
the style of the visit , and the shortness of it , were then felt to be decisive .
“ you are not quite so miserable , though , as when you first came .
emma remained very well pleased with this beginning of the acquaintance , and could now engage to think of them all at randalls any hour of the day , with full confidence in their comfort .
it must be done directly ;
your yorkshire friend your correspondent in yorkshire ;
no longer walking in at all hours , as if ever willing to change his own home for their’s !
“ i shall hear about you all , ” said he ;
it is mrs dixon , i dare say .
but why must she consent to be with the eltons ?
i am resolved to have some in an ornament for the head .
and mrs churchill probably has not health or spirits like selina to enjoy that sort of seclusion .
i was sixteen years old when you were born .
and it was not to be supposed that poor harriet should not be recollecting too ;
miss woodhouse , believe me i have not the presumption to suppose indeed i am not so mad .
“ oh !
“ yes , my dear , if there is time .
i hope we shall have many sweet little concerts together .
this is like giving ourselves a slap , to be sure !
“ she meant to be impertinently curious , just as such an anne cox should be .
harriet was to go ;
he did not omit being sometimes directly before miss smith , or speaking to those who were close to her .
these amazing engagements of mine what have they been ?
i shall hear of every thing that is going on among you .
that is , you would have been very bad , but for perry’s great attention .
am i to suppose then ?
there was no want of likeness , she had been fortunate in the attitude , and as she meant to throw in a little improvement to the figure , to give a little more height , and considerably more elegance , she had great confidence of its being in every way a pretty drawing at last , and of its filling its destined place with credit to them both a standing memorial of the beauty of one , the skill of the other , and the friendship of both ;
he told her that he had been impatient to leave the dining-room hated sitting long was always the first to move when he could that his father , mr knightley , mr cox , and mr cole , were left very busy over parish business that as long as he had staid , however , it had been pleasant enough , as he had found them in general a set of gentlemanlike , sensible men ;
she was his own emma , by hand and word , when they returned into the house ;
as far as good intentions went , we were both right , and i must say that no effects on my side of the argument have yet proved wrong .
what did you look forward to ?
these were charming feelings but not lasting .
and if miss woodhouse of hartfield , the heiress of thirty thousand pounds , were not quite so easily obtained as he had fancied , he would soon try for miss somebody else with twenty , or with ten .
and fully assented to his proposition of mr frank churchill and miss smith making their party quite complete .
and that his continuing to love her had been irresistible .
and he who can do it , where there is no doubt of her regard , must , i think , be the happiest of mortals .
the appearance of the little sitting-room as they entered , was tranquillity itself ;
to take a dislike to a young man , only because he appeared to be of a different disposition from himself , was unworthy the real liberality of mind which she was always used to acknowledge in him ;
i knew he would !
her change was equal .
i have the greatest dislike to the idea of being over-trimmed quite a horror of finery .
this letter has been the cure of all the little nervousness i have been feeling lately .
the party was to be our brother and sister , henry , john and miss smith .
cannot you invent a few hardships for yourself , and be contented to stay ?
he had met her before breakfast as he was returning from a walk with his little boys , when it had been just beginning to rain .
i thought but i beg your pardon , perhaps i have been under a mistake .
but it was so , i suppose .
but it had been no present hope he had only , in the momentary conquest of eagerness over judgment , aspired to be told that she did not forbid his attempt to attach her .
in her imagination it maintained its ground , and henry and john were still asking every day for the story of harriet and the gipsies , and still tenaciously setting her right if she varied in the slightest particular from the original recital .
this does not seem much like joy , indeed , in me (twinkling away a tear or two) but it will be very trying for us to part with her , after having had her so long , and she has a dreadful headache just now , writing all the morning :
rising in his profession , domestic , and respectable in his private character ;
“ my dear miss fairfax , young ladies are very sure to be cared for .
and she and her partner the happiest !
” and frank churchill was heard to say , “ i think you could manage this without effort ;
he would not deny that he did , she was sure .
thy ready wit the word will soon supply .
if any body can deserve him , it must be miss taylor .
when had his influence , such influence begun ?
to be in company , nicely dressed herself and seeing others nicely dressed , to sit and smile and look pretty , and say nothing , was enough for the happiness of the present hour .
i , who may so soon have to guard others !
a situation such as you deserve , and your friends would require for you , is no everyday occurrence , is not obtained at a moment’s notice ;
the kind-hearted , polite old man might then sit down and feel that he had done his duty , and made every fair lady welcome and easy .
i like him very much .
she was nobody when he married her , barely the daughter of a gentleman ;
she believed it would be wiser for her to say and know at once , all that she meant to say and know .
it was a done thing ;
her manner too decided to invite supplication ;
and the part which he was persuaded emma had taken in the affair , was provoking him exceedingly .
is she really not ill ?
she had taken up the idea , she supposed , and made every thing bend to it .
something has happened in brunswick square .
but there was one spirit among them not to be softened , from its power of censure , by bows or smiles mr knightley .
jane , you have never seen mr elton !
may i hope for the honour of your hand for the two first dances of this little projected ball , to be given , not at randalls , but at the crown inn ?
he has passed you very often .
my dear ,’ said i well , and just then came the note .
mrs cole seemed to be relating something of her that was expected to be very interesting .
“ if i can come again , we are still to have our ball .
“ how ?
and she was the more concerned at it , from their being evidently in a conversation which interested them .
what she was , must be uncertain ;
it was at first a considerable shock to him , and he tried earnestly to dissuade her from it .
in ten minutes , however , the child had been perfectly well again .
“ to be sure .
it was most convenient to emma not to make a direct reply to this assertion ;
harriet unfolded the parcel , and she looked on with impatience .
it was no longer in emma’s power to superintend his happiness or quicken his measures .
i have been but half a friend to her ;
(with some elevation) i was thinking of a much more precious circumstance of mr knightley’s coming and asking me to dance , when mr elton would not stand up with me ;
that young man (speaking lower) is very thoughtless .
“ she loves him then excessively , i suppose .
“ i have not a fault to find with her person , ” he replied .
“ mr knightley’s air is so remarkably good that it is not fair to compare mr martin with him .
you are too obliging !
there are people , who the more you do for them , the less they will do for themselves .
you must be sensible that the last half-year has made a great difference in your way of life .
you told me to observe him carefully , and let his behaviour be the rule of mine and so i have .
mrs weston’s poultry-house was robbed one night of all her turkeys evidently by the ingenuity of man .
she did not really like her .
“ not i , indeed .
had she been a person of consequence herself , he would have come i dare say ;
she coloured and laughed .
you would not come in and sit with us in this comfortable way , if you were married .
you will have no business here .
as for mr elton , his manners did not appear but no , she would not permit a hasty or a witty word from herself about his manners .
emma saw him only once ;
so well lighted up !
but , as i said before , are unjust to harriet .
“ i remember once calling you george ,’ in one of my amiable fits , about ten years ago .
colonel campbell is a very agreeable man , and mrs campbell a friendly , warm-hearted woman .
had she left her where she ought , and where he had told her she ought !
it was no wonder that a train of twenty young couple now walked after her to church .
it is a necessary of life to me ;
and will be soon followed by matter-of-fact prose .
mrs stokes ,’ said i but i had not time for more .
and , in the meanwhile , we need not talk much on the subject .
this is a matter of mere common politeness and good-breeding , and has nothing to do with any encouragement to people to marry .
with an alacrity beyond the common impulse of a spirit which yet was never indifferent to the credit of doing every thing well and attentively , with the real good-will of a mind delighted with its own ideas , did she then do all the honours of the meal , and help and recommend the minced chicken and scalloped oysters , with an urgency which she knew would be acceptable to the early hours and civil scruples of their guests .
“ and if i did , (which , however , i am far from allowing) i should not feel that i had done wrong .
he was dining with the randalls family , and jane , at the eltons’ ;
and between useful occupation and the pleasures of society , the next eighteen or twenty years of his life passed cheerfully away .
the preparations must take their time , nothing could be properly ready till the third week were entered on , and for a few days they must be planning , proceeding and hoping in uncertainty at the risk in her opinion , the great risk , of its being all in vain .
harriet’s features are very delicate , which makes a likeness difficult ;
i should be mortified indeed if i did not believe i had been of some use ;
she was pondering , in the meanwhile , upon the possibility , without seeming very rude , of making her escape from jane fairfax’s letter , and had almost resolved on hurrying away directly under some slight excuse , when miss bates turned to her again and seized her attention .
poor harriet !
your room is full enough .
if they are anxious to see you happily married , here is a man whose amiable character gives every assurance of it ;
“ oh !
“ very well and as randalls , i suppose , is not likely to have less influence than heretofore , it strikes me as a possible thing , emma , that henry and john may be sometimes in the way .
harriet is worth a hundred such and for a wife a sensible man’s wife it is invaluable .
poor harriet !
do not tell me .
but to-day you are got back again and as i cannot be always with you , it is best to believe your temper under your own command rather than mine .
“ you ought to know your friend best , ” replied mr knightley ;
“ emma , i must once more speak to you as i have been used to do :
could she but have given harriet her feelings about it all !
“ great has been the pleasure , i am sure .
what mr elton had learned from the ostler on the subject , being the accumulation of the ostler’s own knowledge , and the knowledge of the servants at randalls , was , that a messenger had come over from richmond soon after the return of the party from box hill which messenger , however , had been no more than was expected ;
“ it was her very particular friend , you know .
for , oh !
not to wait upon a bride is very remiss .
i was glad you made her play so much , for having no instrument at her grandmother’s , it must have been a real indulgence .
but mr knightley will be happy .
mrs elton left them no choice .
but what shall i say ?
pray be sincere , knightley .
“ i believe them to be very mutually and very sincerely attached .
she was received with a cordial respect which could not but please , and given all the consequence she could wish for .
that’s very like .
to move , in short , in mrs goddard’s line , to have mrs goddard’s acquaintance .
i wish i had attended to it but (with a sinking voice and a heavy sigh) i seem to have been doomed to blindness .
but his subsequent object was to lament over himself for the heat he was suffering , and the walk he had had for nothing .
you were kept waiting at the door i was quite ashamed but somehow there was a little bustle for it so happened that we had not heard the knock , and till you were on the stairs , we did not know any body was coming .
no doubt it had been from jealousy .
at hartfield , you have had very good specimens of well educated , well bred men .
” replied he .
if you prefer mr martin to every other person ;
“ i have no hesitation in saying , ” replied mr elton , though hesitating a good deal while he spoke ;
with a little reserve of manner , emma continued :
and yet she was a happy woman , and a woman whom no one named without good-will .
emma had not been thinking of him , she had forgotten to think of him but she was very glad to see him .
we were speaking of it only yesterday , and agreeing how fortunate it was for emma , that there should be such a girl in highbury for her to associate with .
how do you do ?
and you can be always with me .
her mutterings were chiefly to her husband ;
mrs elton seemed most favourably impressed by the size of the room , the entrance , and all that she could see or imagine .
a few words which dropped from him yesterday spoke his opinion , and some censure i acknowledge myself liable to .
“ i cannot agree with you , papa ;
this appeal to her affections did more than all the rest .
the charm of an object to occupy the many vacancies of harriet’s mind was not to be talked away .
their first pause was at the crown inn , an inconsiderable house , though the principal one of the sort , where a couple of pair of post-horses were kept , more for the convenience of the neighbourhood than from any run on the road ;
with the exception of this little blot , emma found that his visit hitherto had given her friend only good ideas of him .
how often is happiness destroyed by preparation , foolish preparation !
in addition to all the rest , there had been the shock of finding her so very unwell , which he had had no previous suspicion of and there was every appearance of his having been feeling a great deal .
fancying you to have fathomed his secret .
“ worse than i had supposed .
he was not calm ;
but i am afraid it gives you more pain than you expected .
we removed to windsor ;
and having formerly owed much to mr woodhouse’s kindness , felt his particular claim on her to leave her neat parlour , hung round with fancy-work , whenever she could , and win or lose a few sixpences by his fireside .
i should wish it .
your inexperience really amuses me !
her father never went beyond the shrubbery , where two divisions of the ground sufficed him for his long walk , or his short , as the year varied ;
emma could not have a better companion than harriet .
did he not love mr knightley very much ?
this must be the very shop that every body attends every day of their lives , as my father informs me .
“ it would be a crowd a sad crowd ;
he would be always coming over .
and emma and harriet belonged to frank churchill .
mrs weston , you would be quite laid up ;
i could do very well without it .
“ oh !
and every day was giving her fresh reason for thinking so .
emma could say no more .
and it mortified her that she was given so little credit for proper feeling , or esteemed so little worthy as a friend :
she admired him for contriving it , though not able to give him much credit for the manner in which it was announced .
“ mr elton going to be married !
isabella does not seem more my sister ;
“ did she know ?
miss smith , and miss bickerton , another parlour boarder at mrs goddard’s , who had been also at the ball , had walked out together , and taken a road , the richmond road , which , though apparently public enough for safety , had led them into alarm .
“ my father tried it more than once , formerly ;
“ i hope i am aware that they may be too noisy for your father or even may be some encumbrance to you , if your visiting engagements continue to increase as much as they have done lately .
jane fairfax’s perception seemed to accompany his ;
a very little quiet reflection was enough to satisfy emma as to the nature of her agitation on hearing this news of frank churchill .
“ no , no , ” said she , “ you are quite unreasonable .
i do not mean to say , however , that you might not have made discoveries .
and nothing beyond the merest commonplace had been talked almost all the time till just at last , when mrs martin’s saying , all of a sudden , that she thought miss smith was grown , had brought on a more interesting subject , and a warmer manner .
i wonder you should think it possible for me to have such feelings .
only he is so particularly fond of music that he could not help indulging himself in the purchase , hoping that some of our good neighbours might be so obliging occasionally to put it to a better use than we can ;
“ i do not think it will , ” stopping to look once more at all the outward wretchedness of the place , and recall the still greater within .
and mrs hughes for a moment .
the man must be a blockhead who wanted more .
he meets with a young woman at a watering-place , gains her affection , cannot even weary her by negligent treatment and had he and all his family sought round the world for a perfect wife for him , they could not have found her superior .
and i am not much better yet ;
my dear mrs weston , do not take to match-making .
“ there appeared such a perfectly good understanding among them all ” he began rather quickly , but checking himself , added , “ however , it is impossible for me to say on what terms they really were how it might all be behind the scenes .
mr knightley soon saw that he had lost his moment , and that not another syllable of communication could rest with him .
well to be sure .
which of them is it ?
has he been here this morning ?
and he could sit still with mrs weston , while the dear girls walked about the gardens .
the weather soon improved enough for those to move who must move ;
but he rather pushed it towards me than towards you .
what do you think of him ?
and by the ten days’ end , her nephew’s letter to randalls communicated a change of plan .
his eldest daughter’s alarm was equal to his own .
and yet there is a peculiarity in the shape of the eye and the lines about the mouth which one ought to catch .
and mrs elton was growing impatient to name the day , and settle with mr weston as to pigeon-pies and cold lamb , when a lame carriage-horse threw every thing into sad uncertainty .
.
did not you observe her manner of answering me ?
even if this family , the braithwaites , are put off , i am still afraid that some excuse may be found for disappointing us .
her sister’s favourite room .
no , emma , your amiable young man can be amiable only in french , not in english .
and if he kept his father’s dinner waiting , it was not known at hartfield ;
emma , you are a great dreamer , i think ?
and a twelvemonth might pass without their being thrown together again , with any necessity , or even any power of speech .
mr john knightley’s being a lawyer is very inconvenient .
for better , for worse .
perry says that colds have been very general , but not so heavy as he has very often known them in november .
and yet it is formal .
emma was most sincerely interested .
but i am sure there must be a particular cause for her chusing to come to highbury instead of going with the campbells to ireland .
she was out ;
i will tell you .
ma’am , but there may be a difficulty .
to be dispensing his flatteries around , that he may make all appear like fools compared with himself !
emma did not repent her condescension in going to the coles .
oh no !
she is very charming , i dare say , and all that , but i think her very ill-tempered and disagreeable i shall never forget her look the other night !
i could not have believed it .
all the rest , in speculation at least , was perfectly smooth .
there was a bustle on her approach ;
if she is ill i should be sorry to do her injustice ;
“ how much your friends in ireland must be enjoying your pleasure on this occasion , miss fairfax .
as i tell mr e .
jane took mrs elton aside , and told her at once , that upon thinking over the advantages of mrs smallridge’s situation , she had come to the resolution of accepting it .
there must be three months , at least , of deep mourning ;
your soft eyes shall chuse their own time for beaming .
how very odd !
of walking ;
“ oh !
it seemed all at once as if he were more afraid of its being a bad sore throat on her account , than on harriet’s more anxious that she should escape the infection , than that there should be no infection in the complaint .
i certainly get better and better .
she was obliged to repeat and explain it , before it was fully comprehended ;
“ just as it should be , ” said mr john knightley , “ and just as i hoped it was from your letters .
mrs weston , if there were an account drawn up of the evil and the good i have done miss fairfax !
in such a party , harriet would be rather a dead weight than otherwise ;
but still , as it was desirable that she should appear , in general , like her usual self , she took care to express as much interest in the circumstance , and enter as warmly into mr and mrs weston’s disappointment , as might naturally belong to their friendship .
such an aunt !
but he had gone steadily on , with these objects in view , till they were accomplished .
she had a little beauty and a little accomplishment , but so little judgment that she thought herself coming with superior knowledge of the world , to enliven and improve a country neighbourhood ;
there is my sister ;
a poet in love must be encouraged in both capacities , or neither .
it must be her ardent wish that harriet might be disappointed ;
they had gone , in short and very great had been the evident distress and confusion of the lady .
dear jane , how shall we ever recollect half the dishes for grandmama ?
she , therefore , said no more for some time .
thank you , we do indeed .
i have nothing to do with william’s wants , but it really is of very great importance that i should see knightley to-day ;
they were so deserving , that a little higher should have been enough :
oh !
but already , at dinner , they were too numerous for any subject of conversation to be general ;
but there is nobody hereabouts to attach her ;
june will soon be here .
compliments , charades , and horrible blunders ;
the delightful assurance of her total indifference towards frank churchill , of her having a heart completely disengaged from him , had given birth to the hope , that , in time , he might gain her affection himself ;
“ oh !
her size a most becoming medium , between fat and thin , though a slight appearance of ill-health seemed to point out the likeliest evil of the two .
i cannot really change for the better .
very well i thank you , quite well .
i think miss fairfax dances very well ;
many vain solicitudes would be prevented many awkwardnesses smoothed by it .
she had received a very recent proof of its impartiality .
the difficulty was great of driving his strange insensibility towards harriet , from her mind , while he not only sat at her elbow , but was continually obtruding his happy countenance on her notice , and solicitously addressing her upon every occasion .
she allowed him to talk , and arranged the glasses , and wrapped herself up , without opening her lips .
“ these matters are always a secret , till it is found out that every body knows them .
when they all sat down it was better ;
you like mr elton , papa , i must look about for a wife for him .
emma’s colour was heightened by this unjust praise ;
“ on the misery of what she had suffered , during the concealment of so many months , ” continued mrs weston , “ she was energetic .
i shall certainly have her very often at my house , shall introduce her wherever i can , shall have musical parties to draw out her talents , and shall be constantly on the watch for an eligible situation .
that emma was his object appeared indisputable .
he had misinterpreted the feelings which had kept her face averted , and her tongue motionless .
half a dozen natural children , perhaps and poor frank cut off !
and for an act of unostentatious kindness , there is nobody whom i would fix on more than on mr knightley .
emma denied none of it aloud , and agreed to none of it in private .
but you , (turning to mr knightley ,) who know how very , very seldom i am ever two hours from hartfield , why you should foresee such a series of dissipation for me , i cannot imagine .
“ the carriage !
i feel that i should certainly have been impertinent .
but had i supposed that she were not your attraction to hartfield , i should certainly have thought you judged ill in making your visits so frequent .
that ball !
he took her hand ;
they were rapidly forming words for each other , or for any body else who would be puzzled .
and then , having nothing else to do , formed a sort of half-circle round the fire , to observe in their various modes , till other subjects were started , that , though may , a fire in the evening was still very pleasant .
she knows how very acceptable it must be , at miss taylor’s time of life , to be settled in a home of her own , and how important to her to be secure of a comfortable provision , and therefore cannot allow herself to feel so much pain as pleasure .
to know that she thought his coming certain was enough to make emma consider it so , and sincerely did she rejoice in their joy .
i was sitting near the door elizabeth saw me directly ;
“ never marry !
but i must not propose it yet .
i have never been attached to him .
instead of forgetting him , his behaviour was such that she could not avoid the internal suggestion of “ can it really be as my brother imagined ?
but emma could receive him with the usual smile , and her quick eye soon discerned in his the consciousness of having made a push of having thrown a die ;
.
poor mr woodhouse trembled as he sat , and , as emma had foreseen , would scarcely be satisfied without their promising never to go beyond the shrubbery again .
and even the bustle of collecting and preparing to depart , and the solicitude of mrs elton to have her carriage first , were gladly endured , in the prospect of the quiet drive home which was to close the very questionable enjoyments of this day of pleasure .
and just at last , after harriet’s own account had been given , he had expressed his indignation at the abominable folly of miss bickerton in the warmest terms .
i am excessively fond of music , but without the smallest skill or right of judging of any body’s performance .
she resolved to prevail on her to spend a day at hartfield .
but she behaved very well , and was only rather pale and silent .
very well , i thank you .
the pleasure of looking at somebody new ;
a very few flakes were falling at present , but the clouds were parting , and there was every appearance of its being soon over .
her own conduct , as well as her own heart , was before her in the same few minutes .
you cannot imagine how suddenly it has come on me !
emma wished she had been alone with mrs weston .
it gives one exactly the idea of such a height as miss smith’s .
“ were you to guess her to be eighteen , i should listen with pleasure ;
he has a wife and family to maintain , and is not to be giving away his time .
pray tell me .
this emma felt was aimed at her ;
her father composed himself to sleep after dinner , as usual , and she had then only to sit and think of what she had lost .
” cried emma .
do not be overpowered by such a little tribute of admiration .
not a tear , and hardly a long face to be seen .
she was a beautiful creature when she came to you , but , in my opinion , the attractions you have added are infinitely superior to what she received from nature .
you are afraid of giving me trouble ;
he did consent .
would not she add her persuasions to his , to induce miss woodhouse not to go to mrs goddard’s till it were certain that miss smith’s disorder had no infection ?
i never was more surprized but it does not make me unhappy , i assure you .
he was expected back every day .
the heat overcame me .
the fate of thousands .
he had gone away rejected and mortified disappointed in a very sanguine hope , after a series of what appeared to him strong encouragement ;
how unlucky !
“ nay , how could i help saying what i did ?
harriet seemed quite forgotten in the expectation of a pleasant party .
so frank churchill is a capital dancer , i understand .
not any one , to whom she related with such conviction of being listened to and understood , of being always interesting and always intelligible , the little affairs , arrangements , perplexities , and pleasures of her father and herself .
very good-natured , i declare .
“ but really , i am half ashamed , and wish i had never taken up the idea .
somebody talked of rain .
we shall be most happy to consider you as one of the party .
“ i never had the smallest , i assure you .
my dear , as perry says , where health is at stake , nothing else should be considered ;
come , and eat my strawberries .
but mrs elton detained him , to gratify him by her opinion of his son ;
but james will not like to put the horses to for such a little way ;
“ there is one thing , emma , which a man can always do , if he chuses , and that is , his duty ;
.
she made him , by her acceptance , as happy even as he is deserving .
” but mrs elton was very much discomposed indeed .
and she had lived long enough to know how fortunate she might well be thought , where the only regret was for a partial separation from friends whose friendship for her had never cooled , and who could ill bear to part with her .
if we were obliged to go out such an evening as this , by any call of duty or business , what a hardship we should deem it ;
“ i have not even made any inquiry ;
to bath , or to clifton ?
my perpetual influence could not begin earlier , or you would not have been so much out of humour before .
and her visitors walked upstairs without having any regular narration to attend to , pursued only by the sounds of her desultory good-will .
how to settle the claims of enscombe and hartfield had been a continual impediment less acknowledged by mr weston than by herself but even he had never been able to finish the subject better than by saying “ those matters will take care of themselves ;
they , in their different homes , and their different ways , might be looking back on it with pleasure ;
“ i do not admire it , ” said mr knightley .
” said jane , shaking her head ;
” and james was talked to , and given a charge to go very slow and wait for the other carriage .
in one moment such a change !
“ he may have a great deal of influence on some points , ” continued mrs weston , “ and on others , very little :
but you must not expect a prodigy .
that she was really ill was very certain ;
and yet , you know , there was a sort of satisfaction in seeing him behave so pleasantly and so kindly .
but i must , indeed , for other people .
“ mr knightley .’ you always called me , mr knightley ;’ and , from habit , it has not so very formal a sound .
she is better than handsome !
i dare say they sell gloves .
but she was quite distressed that i had owned the apples were so nearly gone ;
but i could quite as ill spare robert martin .
she thinks so little of her own beauty .
she would rather busy herself about any thing than speak .
to her it was real enjoyment to be with the westons .
“ you are very obliging ;
a large party secures its own amusement .
every body is lazy !
with such sensations , mr elton’s civilities were dreadfully ill-timed ;
dear , i thought it would have been the death of me !
have you heard the news ?
“ i have scarce had the pleasure of seeing you , miss woodhouse , ” she shortly afterwards began , “ since the party to box hill .
“ aye , that’s very just , indeed , that’s very properly said .
not one of them had the power of removal , or of effecting any material change of society .
much that lived in harriet’s memory , many little particulars of the notice she had received from him , a look , a speech , a removal from one chair to another , a compliment implied , a preference inferred , had been unnoticed , because unsuspected , by emma .
” said emma , highly amused .
i have gone too far already for concealment .
they continued together with unabated regard however , till the marriage of miss campbell , who by that chance , that luck which so often defies anticipation in matrimonial affairs , giving attraction to what is moderate rather than to what is superior , engaged the affections of mr dixon , a young man , rich and agreeable , almost as soon as they were acquainted ;
what can be to be broke to me , that does not relate to one of that family ?
“ you are acquainted with miss jane fairfax , sir , are you ?
and they were so very closely followed by another carriage of cousins , who had been entreated to come early with the same distinguishing earnestness , on the same errand , that it seemed as if half the company might soon be collected together for the purpose of preparatory inspection .
with regard to her not accompanying them to ireland , her account to her aunt contained nothing but truth , though there might be some truths not told .
every body so happy !
“ knightley himself !
mrs weston was acting no part , feigning no feelings in all that she said to him in favour of the event .
you know nothing of drawing .
she was vexed .
i think this would convince you .
oh dear , no !
she is so very unreasonable ;
i have not been near randalls , ” when the door was thrown open , and miss bates and miss fairfax walked into the room .
the dream must be borne with , and mr knightley must take his seat with the rest round the large modern circular table which emma had introduced at hartfield , and which none but emma could have had power to place there and persuade her father to use , instead of the small-sized pembroke , on which two of his daily meals had , for forty years been crowded .
such a happy little circle as you find us here .
he went to town on business three days ago , and i got him to take charge of some papers which i was wanting to send to john .
she wanted no explanations , she wanted only to have her thoughts to herself and as for understanding any thing he wrote , she was sure she was incapable of it .
“ you owe me no apologies ;
i must protest against any such idea .
“ it was very bad .
he had caught both substance and shadow both fortune and affection , and was just the happy man he ought to be ;
“ a very pleasant evening , ” he began , as soon as mr woodhouse had been talked into what was necessary , told that he understood , and the papers swept away ;
general benevolence , but not general friendship , made a man what he ought to be .
and a few lines at the same time by the post , stating her extreme surprize at not having had the smallest reply to her last ;
mr elton cared little about it , compared with his wife ;
emma was very compassionate ;
“ i would rather be talking to you , ” he replied ;
i wonder how she speaks of the coles what she calls them !
but (with a smile) if colonel campbell should have employed a careless friend , and if it should prove to have an indifferent tone what shall i say ?
“ she is a very elegant young woman .
“ i rather wonder that it was never made before .
“ i certainly do forget to think of her , ” said emma , “ as having ever been any thing but my friend and my dearest friend .
“ oh !
such smoothness !
the youth and cheerfulness of morning are in happy analogy , and of powerful operation ;
she was invited for at least a fortnight ;
i should have expected better judgment in colonel campbell .
she played and sang ;
for i have a great many more than i can ever use .
“ have not you mistaken the day ?
he looked rather doubtingly rather confused ;
but yet , upon the whole , there was no serious objection raised , except in one habitation , the vicarage .
leave it all to me .
and if i thought i should ever be like miss bates !
she knew a family near maple grove who had tried it , and been obliged to separate before the end of the first quarter .
he had a very fine flock , and , while she was with them , he had been bid more for his wool than any body in the country .
this was the fact .
“ dating from three o’clock yesterday .
she must have had much more to contend with , in carrying on the correspondence , than he could .
harriet kissed her hand in silent and submissive gratitude .
a cold stormy rain set in , and nothing of july appeared but in the trees and shrubs , which the wind was despoiling , and the length of the day , which only made such cruel sights the longer visible .
.
the rest of the day , the following night , were hardly enough for her thoughts .
the rest of the gentlemen being now in the room , emma found herself obliged to turn from him for a few minutes , and listen to mr cole .
he could not say that he was sorry on his own account ;
“ yes , so i imagined .
whether she colours .
there he is .
he was the brother of her friends , and he took pains to please her ;
at this moment they were approaching ford’s , and he hastily exclaimed , “ ha !
and the agreeableness of yesterday’s engagement seemed to give fresh pleasure to the present meeting .
i think they judge wisely .
there is no end of people’s coming to him , on some pretence or other .
“ ah !
“ you have given miss smith all that she required , ” said he ;
i am sure i would not have such a creature as his harry stand at our sideboard for any consideration .
she had seemed more sensible of mr elton’s being to stoop in marrying her , than she now seemed of mr knightley’s .
but mr elton was so near , that she heard every syllable of a dialogue which just then took place between him and mrs weston ;
she must have felt the improper and dangerous distinction .
very well , i thank you .
emma’s project of forgetting mr elton for a while made her rather sorry to find , when they had all taken their places , that he was close to her .
.
they should indeed .
but i ought to have gone before .
“ what an excellent device , ” said he , “ the use of a sheepskin for carriages .
for mr knightley seemed little disposed for conversation ;
“ aye , that may suit your humble ideas of yourself ;
the other circumstance of regret related also to jane fairfax ;
to spend , perhaps , her last months of perfect liberty with those kind relations to whom she was so very dear :
“ but i am afraid , mr elton , harriet will not like to sit .
i am sure you will like to see her .’ i can see nobody ,’ said she ;
i give you credit for it .
but jane , it seems , had a letter from them very lately , and not a word was said about it .
it might be a very indifferent piece of wit , but emma found a great deal to laugh at and enjoy in it and so did frank and harriet .
come , sir , pray let me hear it .
the danger , however , was at present so unperceived , that they did not by any means rank as misfortunes with her .
she said enough to shew there need not be despair and to invite him to say more himself .
but i hope it all went off tolerably well .
i do not think it could disagree with you .
harriet looked white and frightened , and he was trying to cheer her .
he has a great regard for the bateses , you know , independent of jane fairfax and is always glad to shew them attention .
there was too much domestic happiness in his brother’s house ;
i do not wish to make any yet .
and she listened , and smiled , and congratulated .
after being long fed with hopes of a speedy visit from mr and mrs suckling , the highbury world were obliged to endure the mortification of hearing that they could not possibly come till the autumn .
but bristol was her home , the very heart of bristol ;
emma grieved that she could not be more openly just to one important service which his better sense would have rendered her , to the advice which would have saved her from the worst of all her womanly follies her wilful intimacy with harriet smith ;
she promised to think of it , and advised him to think of it more ;
“ my dear harriet , you must not refine too much upon this charade .
“ i hope every body had a pleasant evening , ” said mr woodhouse , in his quiet way .
she is staying here on a visit to her grandmama and aunt , very worthy people ;
i thought it very well done of him indeed .
there was nothing in all this either to astonish or interest , and it caught emma’s attention only as it united with the subject which already engaged her mind .
but miss hawkins , it might be fairly supposed from her easy conceit , had been the best of her own set .
do you know how miss bates and her niece came here ?
looked up , and seeing herself watched , blushed more deeply than he had ever perceived her , and saying only , “ i did not know that proper names were allowed , ” pushed away the letters with even an angry spirit , and looked resolved to be engaged by no other word that could be offered .
he might as well be at enscombe ;
“ yes i should , i am sure i should .
that was what happened before tea .
emma could not think it too soon ;
he had declared himself convinced of it , at randalls .
she believed she had been foolish , but it had alarmed her , and she had been within half a minute of sending for mr perry .
if you think he will come , i shall think so too ;
“ my dear papa , i sent the whole hind-quarter .
emma’s first resolution was to keep her father from the knowledge of what had passed , aware of the anxiety and alarm it would occasion :
i wonder who the friend was and who could be the young lady .
the mr churchills were also in town ;
and then i took courage , and said it did not rain , and i must go ;
i am almost afraid that every moment will bring him .
“ have you indeed , sir ?
yes , my dear , i dare say you might , because you know , the door was open , and the window was open , and mr knightley spoke loud .
jane fairfax did look and move superior ;
but they should be all kept for jane ;
to you to my two daughters i may venture on the truth .
no misfortune occurred , again to prevent the ball .
“ but their going to bath was quite out of the question ;
she played .
the young man had been the first admirer , but she trusted there was no other hold , and that there would be no serious difficulty , on harriet’s side , to oppose any friendly arrangement of her own .
“ absolutely silent !
the time was coming when the news must spread farther , and other persons’ reception of it tried .
i doubt whether he will return the compliment , and discover her to be a lady .
no , i have never had such an idea , and i cannot adopt it now .
every thing wore a different air ;
i am here till claimed by colonel and mrs campbell .
mr churchill has pride ;
but it wants openness .
she would catch a dreadful cold .
“ yes ;
it was most provoking .
of all houses in the kingdom mrs bragge’s is the one i would most wish to see you in .
i believe it is the only way that mr woodhouse thinks the fruit thoroughly wholesome .
“ oh !
some change of countenance was necessary for each gentleman as they walked into mrs weston’s drawing-room ;
we were always glad to see him at hartfield .
and there is the nursery for the children , just as usual , you know .
mrs weston was disengaged and emma began again “ mr frank churchill writes one of the best gentleman’s hands i ever saw .
mr weston , on his side , added a virtue to the account which must have some weight .
this was a pleasure which perhaps the whole day’s visit might not afford , which certainly did not belong to the present half-hour ;
the unpersuadable point , which he did not mention , emma guessed to be good behaviour to his father .
i should be as ready to acknowledge his merits as any other man ;
but , however , i found afterwards from patty , that william said it was all the apples of that sort his master had ;
if she has fancied otherwise , her own wishes have misled her , and i am very sorry extremely sorry but , miss smith , indeed !
mr elton’s engagement had been the cure of the agitation of meeting mr martin .
most likely they will be there to-morrow or saturday .
and nothing less than a summons from richmond was to take him back before the following evening .
pleasure in seeing dancing !
she behaved very well , and betrayed no emotion .
no coffee , i thank you , for me never take coffee .
“ i am very glad i did think of her .
one thing only .
he moved a few steps nearer , and those few steps were enough to prove in how gentlemanlike a manner , with what natural grace , he must have danced , would he but take the trouble .
what blindness , what madness , had led her on !
the scene enlarged ;
he comes to highbury himself , he says , six days out of the seven , and has always business at ford’s .
“ but you must often wish it , i am sure .
she must not make it a more decided subject of misery to him , by a melancholy tone herself .
he wished to persuade mr woodhouse , as well as emma , to join the party ;
by birth she belonged to highbury :
“ yes , oh !
“ there is one subject , ” he replied , “ i hope but one , on which we do not think alike .
“ having understood as much , i was rather astonished to find her so very lady-like !
the evil day was put off .
mrs weston , capital in her country-dances , was seated , and beginning an irresistible waltz ;
were he ever able to get away , the day would be spent in coming and returning .
but now the campbells had promised their daughter to stay at least till midsummer , and fresh invitations had arrived for her to join them there .
and the only literary pursuit which engaged harriet at present , the only mental provision she was making for the evening of life , was the collecting and transcribing all the riddles of every sort that she could meet with , into a thin quarto of hot-pressed paper , made up by her friend , and ornamented with ciphers and trophies .
in the summer it might have passed ;
she will be extremely sorry to miss seeing you , miss woodhouse , but your kindness will excuse her .
“ and when she had come away , mrs martin was so very kind as to send mrs goddard a beautiful goose the finest goose mrs goddard had ever seen .
perhaps to hartfield , perhaps to the abbey mill , perhaps into his woods .
will not it be beautiful in her dark hair ?
however , it was an exceeding good , pretty letter , and gave mr and mrs weston a great deal of pleasure .
i wish you could have heard how she talked of it with what candour and generosity .
admits our apology , and is not offended .
“ indifferent !
“ you are expecting her again , you say , this morning ?
if harriet , from being humble , were grown vain , it was her doing too .
morning decidedly the best time never tired every sort good hautboy infinitely superior no comparison the others hardly eatable hautboys very scarce chili preferred white wood finest flavour of all price of strawberries in london abundance about bristol maple grove cultivation beds when to be renewed gardeners thinking exactly different no general rule gardeners never to be put out of their way delicious fruit only too rich to be eaten much of inferior to cherries currants more refreshing only objection to gathering strawberries the stooping glaring sun tired to death could bear it no longer must go and sit in the shade .
more disposed to stay at home than engage in schemes of pleasure .
where the wound had been given , there must the cure be found if anywhere ;
but ah !
and having some feelings himself which almost admitted it , he began to think that some time or other in another year or two , perhaps it might not be so very bad if the marriage did take place .
he positively said that it had been known to no being in the world but their two selves .
how could you be so unfeeling to miss bates ?
they are to be new set .
and i will step to mrs goddard in a moment , if you wish it .
it soon appeared that london was not the place for her .
i , being a husband , and you not being a wife , the claims of the man may very likely strike us with equal force .
one of my senseless tricks !
but as i have always had a thoroughly good opinion of miss fairfax , i never could , under any blunder , have spoken ill of her ;
had it , by any blessed felicity , occurred to her , to institute the comparison .
“ what do you say to mrs dixon ?
she knows now what gentlemen are ;
three or four-and-twenty cannot be without the means of doing as much as that .
“ i have always thought it a very foolish intimacy , ” said mr knightley presently , “ though i have kept my thoughts to myself ;
he was afraid not even miss woodhouse ” he stopt a moment “ or miss smith could inspire him .
but you know they were your own words , that more wonderful things had happened , matches of greater disparity had taken place than between mr frank churchill and me ;
for a moment he was silent ;
he thanked her with all his heart , and continued some time to speak with serious feeling of his gratitude and happiness .
if he were to be very alert in engaging jane fairfax now , it might augur something .
i am no flatterer .
“ his feelings are natural .
“ don’t ask me .
your real workmen , i suppose , hold their tongues ;
for highbury was reckoned a particularly healthy spot :
he saw a short word prepared for emma , and given to her with a look sly and demure .
he thanked her , observing , “ how lucky that we should arrive at the same moment !
and , besides , you have another long walk before you , to donwell abbey .
his face lengthened immediately ;
of business , shows of cattle , or new drills and might not you , in the confusion of so many subjects , mistake him ?
some scruples and some reluctance the widower-father may be supposed to have felt ;
what are they saying about mr perry ?
every line relating to herself was interesting , and almost every line agreeable ;
“ yes , and what you told me on that head , confirmed an idea which i had entertained before .
“ ah !
whatever advantages she may have enjoyed with the campbells are so palpably at an end !
“ it is a most repulsive quality , indeed , ” said he .
but i do not understand how the room at the crown can be safer for you than your father’s house .
it is frank churchill’s duty to pay this attention to his father .
if we walk fast , we shall soon be at randalls .
whenever there is any temptation of pleasure .
and henry and john had seen more drops than they could count long before .
“ who shall answer that question ?
“ henry is a fine boy , but john is very like his mama .
he is off .
her father’s comfort was amply secured , mrs bates as well as mrs goddard being able to come ;
“ now he has got my letter , ” said she softly .
“ oh !
the sole grievance and alloy thus removed in the prospect of harriet’s welfare , she was really in danger of becoming too happy for security .
used only to a large house himself , and without ever thinking how many advantages and accommodations were attached to its size , he could be no judge of the privations inevitably belonging to a small one .
but she having then induced miss fairfax to join her in an airing , was now returned with much more to say , and much more to say with satisfaction , than a quarter of an hour spent in mrs bates’s parlour , with all the encumbrance of awkward feelings , could have afforded .
it is his own idea .
what will you say , emma what will any body say , when it is known that frank churchill and miss fairfax are engaged ;
“ i think they will neither of them do the other any good .
he proceeded a little farther , reading to himself ;
an old married man quite good for nothing .
the child to be born at randalls must be a tie there even dearer than herself ;
my uncle has been too good for me to encroach .
you know i could not do less ;
“ i do not wonder , miss woodhouse , ” she resumed , “ that you should feel a great difference between the two , as to me or as to any body .
“ so far as that it relates to mr frank churchill , i do guess .
“ with all my heart .
“ i shall never be easy till i have seen some of these places .
mrs weston was looking so ill , and had an air of so much perturbation , that emma’s uneasiness increased ;
she was warmly gratified and in another moment still more so , by a little movement of more than common friendliness on his part .
that will obviate all difficulties you know ;
” then having recourse to her workbasket , in excuse for leaning down her face , and concealing all the exquisite feelings of delight and entertainment which she knew she must be expressing , she added , “ well , now tell me every thing ;
such was his own account at randall’s .
and as for objects of interest , objects for the affections , which is in truth the great point of inferiority , the want of which is really the great evil to be avoided in not marrying , i shall be very well off , with all the children of a sister i love so much , to care about .
mr frank churchill did not come .
i may be allowed , i hope , the use of my judgment as well as mr perry .
anxious to separate herself from them as far as she could , she soon afterwards took possession of a narrow footpath , a little raised on one side of the lane , leaving them together in the main road .
they must not do less than others , or she should be exposed to odious suspicions , and imagined capable of pitiful resentment .
i have observed , mrs elton , in the course of my life , that if things are going untowardly one month , they are sure to mend the next .
the very last person whom one should expect to be forgotten !
but , when they were all in the ballroom again , her eyes invited him irresistibly to come to her and be thanked .
i do not want the match i do not want to injure dear little henry but the idea has been given me by circumstances ;
well , i was persuaded there were two .
he could not have appeared to greater advantage perhaps anywhere , than where he had placed himself .
the amiable , obliging , gentle mr elton .
and there was so much embarrassment and occupation of mind to shorten it , that emma would not allow herself entirely to form an opinion of the lady , and on no account to give one , beyond the nothing-meaning terms of being “ elegantly dressed , and very pleasing .
not diffuse enough for a woman .
” and she walked on , amusing herself in the consideration of the blunders which often arise from a partial knowledge of circumstances , of the mistakes which people of high pretensions to judgment are for ever falling into ;
one of the otways .
you confined to the society of the illiterate and vulgar all your life !
“ i do not know what i could imagine , but i confess that i have seldom seen a face or figure more pleasing to me than hers .
“ perhaps you may now begin to regret that you spent one whole day , out of so few , in having your hair cut .
and , by the bye , can i or my housekeeper be of any use to you with our opinion ?
but she soon felt that concealment must be impossible .
jane declined it , however , and the husband and wife walked off .
let us be discreet quite on our good behaviour .
harriet repeated expressions of approbation and praise from him and emma felt them to be in the closest agreement with what she had known of his opinion of harriet .
but emma heard him almost immediately afterwards say to himself , over a newspaper he held in his hand , “ hum !
thank you for the sight of it .
or a mermaid ?
i can hardly imagine the young man whom i saw talking with you the other day could express himself so well , if left quite to his own powers , and yet it is not the style of a woman ;
true affection only could have prompted it .
come , shake hands with me .
a little while ago , every letter to isabella brought an account of fresh gaieties ;
she rose early , and wrote her letter to harriet ;
“ but , my dear sir , the difference of the journey ;
quite otherwise indeed , if i understood miss fairfax’s opinion last night .
“ she has had the advantage , you know , of practising on me , ” she continued “ like la baronne d’almane on la comtesse d’ostalis , in madame de genlis’ adelaide and theodore , and we shall now see her own little adelaide educated on a more perfect plan .
but this does not acquit him , mrs weston ;
so many friends !
“ very nicely dressed , indeed ;
they are jealous even of his regard for his father .
she was in gay spirits , and would have prolonged the conversation , wanting to hear the particulars of his suspicions , every look described , and all the wheres and hows of a circumstance which highly entertained her :
to amuse her , and be agreeable in her eyes , seemed all that he cared for and emma , glad to be enlivened , not sorry to be flattered , was gay and easy too , and gave him all the friendly encouragement , the admission to be gallant , which she had ever given in the first and most animating period of their acquaintance ;
should suppose himself her equal in connexion or mind !
“ so do i , ” said mrs weston gently , “ very much .
so frank writes word .
but my dancing days are over , mrs weston .
“ this is a circumstance which i must think of at least half a day , before i can at all comprehend it .
i hope she is right .
“ no , sir , ” cried emma , “ it confesses no such thing .
mrs weston was convinced that such conversation must be the greatest relief to her companion , pent up within her own mind as every thing had so long been , and was very much pleased with all that she had said on the subject .
one cannot creep upon a journey ;
and jane fairfax , too , of all women !
emma woodhouse , handsome , clever , and rich , with a comfortable home and happy disposition , seemed to unite some of the best blessings of existence ;
he is no object of regret , indeed !
i absolutely cannot do without music .
but it was time to appear to forget that they had ever quarrelled ;
and i have hardly begun to enjoy myself .
now there would be pleasure in her returning every thing would be a pleasure .
and it had been always imagined that they were to be so intimate because their ages were the same , every body had supposed they must be so fond of each other .
it is natural , and it is honourable .
“ i hope , ” said he presently , “ i have not been severe upon poor mrs churchill .
“ he was afraid they should have a very bad drive .
no , no ;
i set off without saying a word , just as i told you .
it would hold the very number for comfort .
and while her father was fondly noticing the beauty of her dress , to make the two ladies all the amends in her power , by helping them to large slices of cake and full glasses of wine , for whatever unwilling self-denial his care of their constitution might have obliged them to practise during the meal .
they must have the letter over again , and settle how long he had been gone , and how much he was engaged in company , and what a favourite he was wherever he went , and how full the master of the ceremonies’ ball had been ;
the party did not break up without emma’s being positively secured for the two first dances by the hero of the evening , nor without her overhearing mr weston whisper to his wife , “ he has asked her , my dear .
while you were in the smallest degree wavering , i said nothing about it , because i would not influence ;
harriet was not insensible of manner ;
i believe you were glad we danced no longer ;
her mind returned to mrs elton’s offences , and long , very long , did they occupy her .
but that it will be a fortunate preference is more than i can promise .
a mere joke among ourselves .
i thought it would interest you , ” said mr knightley , with a smile which implied a conviction of some part of what had passed between them .
“ oh no , no !
“ but you need not imagine mr weston to have felt what you would feel in giving up henry or john .
so obliged to you for the carriage last night .
mr weston had been so very earnest in his entreaties for her arriving there as soon as possible after themselves , for the purpose of taking her opinion as to the propriety and comfort of the rooms before any other persons came , that she could not refuse him , and must therefore spend some quiet interval in the young man’s company .
would not mr knightley shew them the gardens all the gardens ?
she felt that she should like to have had the power of refusal ;
“ ill , very ill that is , if a young lady can ever be allowed to look ill .
let her marry robert martin , and she is safe , respectable , and happy for ever ;
and i have now quite determined , and really almost made up my mind to refuse mr martin .
of all the sources of evil surrounding the former , since her coming to highbury , she was persuaded that she must herself have been the worst .
“ you are very kind but you are mistaken and i must set you right .
there always is in february , you know , and we could not do half that we intended .
where i sit is of no consequence .
i leave you to your own reflections .
and , for half a minute , emma felt the glory of having schemed successfully .
mr weston would not be blind to folly , though in his own son ;
since i began this letter , which will be longer than i foresaw , i have heard from her .
ladies and gentlemen , i am ordered by miss woodhouse (who , wherever she is , presides) to say , that she desires to know what you are all thinking of ?
an injunction of secresy had been among mr weston’s parting words .
harriet’s behaviour was so extremely odd , that emma did not know how to understand it .
standing up in the middle of the room , i suppose , and speaking as loud as he could !
“ and i am sure i should never want to go there ;
“ you are very kind , but i know what my manners were to you .
she was a very pretty girl , and her beauty happened to be of a sort which emma particularly admired .
but harriet was in a tremor , and could not touch it ;
all that were good would be withdrawn ;
it has sunk him , i cannot say how it has sunk him in my opinion .
she had not even a share in his opening compliments .
the acquaintance she had already formed were unworthy of her .
good i am sure .
there cannot be two opinions about him .
“ governess-trade , i assure you , was all that i had in view ;
emma grew sick at the sound .
i shall do very well again after a little while and then , it will be a good thing over ;
how did you think the coxes looked ?
he had only himself to please in his choice :
i have been acting contrary to all my sense of right ;
if we feel for the wretched , enough to do all we can for them , the rest is empty sympathy , only distressing to ourselves .
i can imagine , that before she had seen any body superior , she might tolerate him .
i am a great dreamer .
“ yes , ” said his brother quickly , “ it is randalls that does it all .
“ my dear , you do not understand me .
she hardly knew what to say .
dear emma has been to call on mrs and miss bates , mr knightley , as i told you before .
she is a complete angel .
and it was his object to see as much as he could , with as little apparent observation .
for ten minutes she could hear nothing but herself .
it shews what a sad invalid i am !
it regarded a supper-room .
mrs and miss bates occupied the drawing-room floor ;
but , as it is , the disappointment is single , and , i trust , will not be lasting .
she could tell nothing of hartfield , in which mrs weston had not a lively concern ;
do help me .
” said emma .
emma looked at her , quite unable to speak .
“ by all means .
as to connexion , there emma was perfectly easy ;
“ i do not believe any such thing , ” replied emma .
” he listened with all due deference ;
emma could not speak .
very far from it , i assure you .
he had dwelt on them to her more than once .
“ a throat very much inflamed , with a great deal of heat about her , a quick , low pulse , &c .
i am sure miss fairfax must have found the evening pleasant , emma .
and she had no intellectual superiority to make atonement to herself , or frighten those who might hate her into outward respect .
isabella had been pleased with harriet ;
i am afraid you must have had a shocking walk .
and the necessity of exertion made him composed .
and i had plenty all the while in my pocket !
that if not foolish she was ignorant , and that her society would certainly do mr elton no good .
but he hoped he should in time .
” she was extremely concerned ;
she had bound herself to do it , in such an hour of mr knightley’s absence , or when it came to the point her heart would have failed her , and she must have put it off ;
she was then interrupted by harriet’s coming in ;
“ very bad though it might have been worse .
“ but i cannot give up my early walk .
she did unfeignedly and unequivocally regret the inferiority of her own playing and singing .
exactly so , indeed quite unheard of but some ladies say any thing .
there is nobody in highbury who deserves him and he has been here a whole year , and has fitted up his house so comfortably , that it would be a shame to have him single any longer and i thought when he was joining their hands to-day , he looked so very much as if he would like to have the same kind office done for him !
” said she , “ i get quite anxious about you .
what is to be done ?
he looked as if he felt it .
i should like it of all things , ” was not plainer in words than manner .
no till cole alluded to my supposed attachment , it had never entered my head .
that very dear part of emma , her fancy , received an amusing supply .
time , however , she thought , would tell him that they ought to be friends again .
“ i cannot wish to be snowed up a week at randalls .
harriet is disgraced by any comparison .
and whether his compliments were to be considered as marks of acquiescence , or proofs of defiance .
i could not excuse a man’s having more music than love more ear than eye a more acute sensibility to fine sounds than to my feelings .
is not , by any means , to be compared with miss fairfax .
“ ah !
you persuaded her to refuse him .
i would not say so to every body , mrs elton , but i have not much faith in mrs churchill’s illness .
and all the other outward circumstances of arrangement , accommodation , and punctuality , were in favour of a pleasant party .
but i never have been in love ;
“ oh , the difference of situation and habit !
it is out of the common course that what is so evidently , so palpably desirable what courts the pre-arrangement of other people , should so immediately shape itself into the proper form .
but so much as patty has to do !
but john , as to what i was telling you of my idea of moving the path to langham , of turning it more to the right that it may not cut through the home meadows , i cannot conceive any difficulty .
the weather affected mr woodhouse , and he could only be kept tolerably comfortable by almost ceaseless attention on his daughter’s side , and by exertions which had never cost her half so much before .
harriet was a little distressed did look a little foolish at first :
behold him there , the monarch of the seas !
“ a sore-throat !
though now the middle of december , there had yet been no weather to prevent the young ladies from tolerably regular exercise ;
wrapt up in her family ;
“ mrs churchill is not much in my good graces , as you may suspect but this is quite between ourselves .
if it can be contrived to be at the crown , papa , it will be very convenient for the horses .
i never saw any thing equal to the comfort and style candles everywhere .
mrs weston agreed to it ;
and boasted himself an engaged man , which his father looked his most perfect approbation of and it then appeared that mrs weston was wanting him to dance with mrs elton himself , and that their business was to help to persuade him into it , which was done pretty soon .
a little while ago , he was at weymouth .
“ and so you absolutely opened what was directed to her !
and it is natural to suppose that we should be intimate , that we should have taken to each other whenever she visited her friends .
“ this is a pleasure , ” said he , in rather a low voice , “ coming at least ten minutes earlier than i had calculated .
she received my attentions with an easy , friendly , goodhumoured playfulness , which exactly suited me .
“ poor mr and miss woodhouse , if you please ;
has emma read it all ?
the prospect before her now , was threatening to a degree that could not be entirely dispelled that might not be even partially brightened .
but (in a very depressed tone) she is coming for only one week .
and without being able to forget that among the failings of mr elton , even in the days of his favour , none had disturbed her more than his propensity to dine with mr cole .
if it was not for the drawback of her illness but i am afraid we must expect to see her grown thin , and looking very poorly .
jane fairfax was an orphan , the only child of mrs bates’s youngest daughter .
and it is poverty only which makes celibacy contemptible to a generous public !
mrs john knightley was a pretty , elegant little woman , of gentle , quiet manners , and a disposition remarkably amiable and affectionate ;
now for the cream .
selina has entirely given up music never touches the instrument though she played sweetly .
“ you have heard of a certain frank churchill , i presume , ” he continued “ and know him to be my son , though he does not bear my name .
“ well , my dear , ” he deliberately began , “ considering we never saw her before , she seems a very pretty sort of young lady ;
how is miss fairfax ?
i think we do want a larger council .
no ;
people who have extensive grounds themselves are always pleased with any thing in the same style .
he was not a great favourite with his fair sister-in-law .
dear mrs weston !
emma made no answer , and tried to look cheerfully unconcerned , but was really feeling uncomfortable and wanting him very much to be gone .
the room they were taken into was the one he chiefly occupied , and looking forwards ;
my father perhaps will think i ought to add , with the deepest humiliation .
miss woodhouse , how kind you are !
mr woodhouse had been exceedingly well amused .
dear miss woodhouse , do advise me .
but she was not wanted to speak .
if emma had still , at intervals , an anxious feeling for harriet , a momentary doubt of its being possible for her to be really cured of her attachment to mr knightley , and really able to accept another man from unbiased inclination , it was not long that she had to suffer from the recurrence of any such uncertainty .
and when at three years old , on losing her mother , she became the property , the charge , the consolation , the foundling of her grandmother and aunt , there had seemed every probability of her being permanently fixed there ;
how do you do ?
regular features , open countenance , with a complexion !
a few more to-morrows , and the party from london would be arriving .
and when mr elton himself arrived to triumph in his happy prospects , and circulate the fame of her merits , there was very little more for him to do , than to tell her christian name , and say whose music she principally played .
and many a long october and november evening must be struggled through at hartfield , before christmas brought the next visit from isabella and her husband , and their little children , to fill the house , and give her pleasant society again .
you will not like staying late .
for it is not five minutes since i received mrs cole’s note no , it cannot be more than five or at least ten for i had got my bonnet and spencer on , just ready to come out i was only gone down to speak to patty again about the pork jane was standing in the passage were not you , jane ?
” emma was half-ashamed of her friend for seeming so pleased and so doubtful .
to be constantly living with an ill-tempered person , must be dreadful .
she speaks a little too quick .
she would not stir a step , nor drop a hint .
pardon me but you will be limited as to number only three at once .
and was beginning a new period of existence , with every probability of greater happiness than in any yet passed through .
there was nothing like flirtation between her and her partner .
“ to be sure our discordancies must always arise from my being in the wrong .
liable as you have been to severe colds , indeed you ought to be particularly careful , especially at this time of year .
emma could not but rejoice to hear that she had a fault .
she and the children might stay very well .
i was once very near and i wish i had it would have been better .
as a walking companion , emma had very early foreseen how useful she might find her .
mr martin looked as if he did not know what manner was .
“ i think her all you describe .
” he soon resumed ;
for with all the high opinion of himself , which she had often laid to his charge , she had never before for a moment supposed it could make him unjust to the merit of another .
john knightley , forgetting that he did not belong to their party , stept in after his wife very naturally ;
so far off !
and spoke so handsomely of highbury altogether thought it so abundant in agreeable families that emma began to feel she had been used to despise the place rather too much .
we were speaking the other day , you know , of his being so warm an admirer of her performance .
it could not be done without a reproof to him , which would be giving pain to his wife ;
“ mr dixon .
and frank churchill , coming up with most becoming gallantry to emma , had secured her hand , and led her up to the top .
and after a morning of some anxious watching , frank churchill , in all the certainty of his own self , reached randalls before dinner , and every thing was safe .
she had to destroy all the hopes which she had been so industriously feeding to appear in the ungracious character of the one preferred and acknowledge herself grossly mistaken and mis-judging in all her ideas on one subject , all her observations , all her convictions , all her prophecies for the last six weeks .
but yet , harriet , more wonderful things have taken place , there have been matches of greater disparity .
the campbells , the dixons , did none of them know of the engagement ?
“ it has a disagreeable look to me .
it was stopt by mr and mrs weston , who were standing to speak to her .
he was wishing to confide in her perhaps to consult her ;
” cried harriet .
“ a man , ” said he , “ must have a very good opinion of himself when he asks people to leave their own fireside , and encounter such a day as this , for the sake of coming to see him .
but in every respect , as she saw more of her , she approved her , and was confirmed in all her kind designs .
she must know as well as her father , how acceptable an instrument would be ;
donwell was famous for its strawberry-beds , which seemed a plea for the invitation :
“ what sort of looking man is mr martin ?
“ ah !
escape , however , was not his plan .
this amiable , upright , perfect jane fairfax was apparently cherishing very reprehensible feelings .
you (blushing as she spoke) who can see into every body’s heart ;
they added to their house , to their number of servants , to their expenses of every sort ;
“ i see no probability in it , unless you have any better foundation than what you mention .
it had no advantage of situation ;
you provide for the family , you know , (with a smile at his father) .
you shall not , indeed .
i care for nothing else .
i do not by any means engage for its being returned .
emma was a good deal surprized ;
she wished i had made him believe we had a great many left .
you are an odd creature !
oh !
“ she had engaged to go as governess to mrs smallridge’s children a dear friend of mrs elton’s a neighbour of maple grove ;
mr elton had been determined to go on , and had said in a very particular way indeed , that he was going on business which he would not put off for any inducement in the world ;
he sends us a sack every year ;
“ as to who , or what miss hawkins is , or how long he has been acquainted with her , ” said emma , “ nothing i suppose can be known .
but , the truth is , that i am waiting for my lord and master .
mrs perry had told somebody , and was extremely happy about it .
not often deficient either in manner or comprehension .
perhaps it was not fair to expect him to feel how very much he was her inferior in talent , and all the elegancies of mind .
this is brilliant indeed !
and she hoped it might rather assist the restoration of friendship , that when he came into the room she had one of the children with her the youngest , a nice little girl about eight months old , who was now making her first visit to hartfield , and very happy to be danced about in her aunt’s arms .
you do not know what it is to have tempers to manage .
but , compared with the evil to harriet , all was light ;
and no apology left , no message for me .
their intercourse was painful enough by letter .
i hope not infectious .
“ mr perry , ” said he , in a voice of very strong displeasure , “ would do as well to keep his opinion till it is asked for .
oh !
yes , i am quite aware of that .
he is as happy as possible by himself ;
now i am secure of you for ever .
i used to think she was not capable of being fond of any body , except herself :
it was after tea that jane spoke to mrs elton .
the thing is , to be always happy with pleasant companions .
but as an approver , (a much safer character ,) she was truly welcome .
but , upon my word , mr elton , in your case , i should certainly excuse myself .
and this picture of her present sufferings acted as a cure of every former ungenerous suspicion , and left her nothing but pity ;
i bring a new proposal on the subject :
it was a dislike so little just every imputed fault was so magnified by fancy , that she never saw jane fairfax the first time after any considerable absence , without feeling that she had injured her ;
“ yes , yes but i am amused that he should have seen so far into my feelings .
mr weston was a great favourite , and there was not a creature in the world to whom she spoke with such unreserve , as to his wife ;
mrs weston informed her that she was going to call on the bateses , in order to hear the new instrument .
“ oh !
“ yes a good deal nearer .
mrs elton swelled at the idea of miss woodhouse’s presiding ;
good mrs stokes would not know her own room again .
and if he did not invent illnesses for her , she could make no figure in a message .
emma had feelings , less of curiosity than of pride or propriety , to make her resolve on not being the last to pay her respects ;
every body had a degree of gravity and sorrow ;
she spoke with a confidence which staggered , with a satisfaction which silenced , mr knightley .
very pleasant party .
i could not refuse ;
i know what worthy people they are .
these feelings rapidly restored his comfort , while mrs weston , of a more apprehensive disposition , foresaw nothing but a repetition of excuses and delays ;
and though her understanding almost acquiesced in the assurance of both the mr knightleys , that when once the event were over , his distress would be soon over too , she hesitated she could not proceed .
she looked up at him for a moment , coloured deeply , and played something else .
mr weston was chatty and convivial , and no friend to early separations of any sort ;
her eyes , a deep grey , with dark eye-lashes and eyebrows , had never been denied their praise ;
emma was out of hearing .
“ oh !
“ this present from the campbells , ” said she “ this pianoforte is very kindly given .
no friends had deserted them , no pleasures had been lost .
supposing even that they had never become intimate friends ;
emma thought at least it would turn out so .
and colonel campbell’s residence being in london , every lighter talent had been done full justice to , by the attendance of first-rate masters .
“ i have no doubt of it .
perfectly remember mrs perry’s coming .
harriet smith’s intimacy at hartfield was soon a settled thing .
but it is an excellent thing to have frank among us again , so near as town .
at this moment frank began talking so vigorously , that emma could not but imagine he had overheard his own praises , and did not want to hear more ;
in a country life i conceive it to be a sort of necessary ;
i see jane every day :
“ and you have forgotten one matter of joy to me , ” said emma , “ and a very considerable one that i made the match myself .
“ well , ” said she to herself , “ this is most strange !
he is very well to do himself , you know , being head man at the crown , ostler , and every thing of that sort , but still he cannot keep his father without some help ;
i know him well .
it always has quite hurt me that jane fairfax , who plays so delightfully , should not have an instrument .
if she has it now , you have given it .
she was almost sure that for a young woman , a stranger , a bride , there was too much ease .
nor can it be very easy to take any likeness of them , beyond the air and complexion , unless they are coarser featured than any of mama’s children ever were .
the strength of the song falls on the second .
donwell lane is never dusty , and now it is perfectly dry .
mr frank churchill , indeed !
and entering into her feelings , promoted her quitting the house immediately , and watched her safely off with the zeal of a friend .
but i did assure him that two carriages were not necessary to my happiness , nor were spacious apartments .
the real evils , indeed , of emma’s situation were the power of having rather too much her own way , and a disposition to think a little too well of herself ;
i am sure they will want it ;
blessed with so many resources within myself , the world was not necessary to me .
one accompaniment to her song took her agreeably by surprize a second , slightly but correctly taken by frank churchill .
“ depend upon it , mrs churchill does every thing that any other fine lady ever did .
and while the others were variously urging and recommending , mr knightley and emma settled it in a few brief sentences :
this charade !
leave shame to her .
she wished she could know that they had been allowed to eat it .
that i had been satisfied with persuading her not to accept young martin .
“ these are difficulties which you must settle for yourself .
there was one , however , which emma thought something of .
that she associates with gentlemen’s daughters , no one , i apprehend , will deny .
yet he would speak .
the very next day however produced some proof of inspiration .
he is a very liberal thanker , with his thousands and tens of thousands .
he is not a gallant man , but he is a very humane one ;
“ my dear sir , upon no account in the world ;
do not you think her cure does perry the highest credit ?
they seem to satisfy every body else .
oh !
” said mr weston .
ten couple may stand here very well .
“ i like your plan , ” cried mr weston .
this letter , however , was written , and sealed , and sent .
but mr elton , in person , had driven away all such cares .
when you have been here a little longer , miss fairfax , you will understand that mr elton is the standard of perfection in highbury , both in person and mind .
an abominable puppy !
he had walked up one day after dinner , as he very often did , to spend his evening at hartfield .
it was adventuring too far , assuming too much , making light of what ought to be serious , a trick of what ought to be simple .
the letter had much better be all your own .
and i dare say we shall get home very well .
but i shall always think it a very abominable sort of proceeding .
but it was now too evident that she had not attained such a state of composure as could stand against the actual approach new carriage , bell-ringing , and all .
papa , if you speak in that melancholy way , you will be giving isabella a false idea of us all .
but the soothing attentions of his daughters gradually removed the present evil , and the immediate alertness of one brother , and better recollections of the other , prevented any renewal of it .
however , i must say , that robert martin’s heart seemed for him , and to me , very overflowing ;
he had said that jane fairfax received attentions from mrs elton which nobody else paid her .
it was a sad event a great shock with all her faults , what would mr churchill do without her ?
how do you do , mr richard ?
however , now i will destroy it all and it is my particular wish to do it in your presence , that you may see how rational i am grown .
so far from having long understood you , i have been in a most complete error with respect to your views , till this moment .
mrs weston had been shewing them all to him , and now he would shew them all to emma ;
that is too young to settle .
and could make out from his answers that , as far as enscombe was concerned , there was very little going on , that their visitings were among a range of great families , none very near ;
i undertake the commission .
a disagreeable truth would be palatable through her lips , but i am the wretchedest being in the world at a civil falsehood .
” said mrs weston in a trembling voice .
but one morning i forget exactly the day but perhaps it was the tuesday or wednesday before that evening , he wanted to make a memorandum in his pocket-book ;
the affection of the whole family , the warm attachment of miss campbell in particular , was the more honourable to each party from the circumstance of jane’s decided superiority both in beauty and acquirements .
and as for herself , she was too much provoked and offended to have the power of directly saying any thing to the purpose .
pray , dear miss woodhouse , tell me what i ought to do .
oh !
it rained dreadfully hard for half an hour while we were at breakfast .
she had fallen into good hands , known nothing but kindness from the campbells , and been given an excellent education .
and as harriet exultingly proclaimed it , there was a blush on jane’s cheek which gave it a meaning not otherwise ostensible .
she could not repent .
she will never like me now .
this was her history ;
i love to look at her ;
“ you do quite right , ” said she ;
he may spend the evening with his dear william larkins now if he likes .
the next morning brought mr frank churchill again .
does not she , jane ?
harriet slept at hartfield that night .
if any thing , you are too attentive .
now you are looking very sly .
she could never quit him .
no , indeed .
ii’d rather you would .
and emma , because she had miss fairfax .
and she could suppose herself but an indifferent judge of such matters in general , and very inadequate to sympathise in an attachment to mr elton in particular ;
that her own maid should sit up for her ;
emma then looked up , and immediately saw how it was ;
and in one of the most comfortable rooms in the abbey , especially prepared for him by a fire all the morning , he was happily placed , quite at his ease , ready to talk with pleasure of what had been achieved , and advise every body to come and sit down , and not to heat themselves .
she heard of her walking with the eltons , sitting with the eltons , spending a day with the eltons !
emma could now imagine why her own attentions had been slighted .
miss woodhouse , this is not like our friend knightley !
we must go in the carriage , to be sure .
” said he with a tender sigh , as he received it .
he gave me a quiet hint ;
and though it was impossible not to feel that he had been wrong , yet he had been less wrong than she had supposed and he had suffered , and was very sorry and he was so grateful to mrs weston , and so much in love with miss fairfax , and she was so happy herself , that there was no being severe ;
“ good or bad ?
“ i think there will be very tolerable room for ten couple .
“ who could have thought it ?
and here i am conscious of wrong , for that visit might have been sooner paid .
emma , who was not really at all frightened herself , tranquillised this excess of apprehension by assurances of mrs goddard’s experience and care ;
can you imagine any thing nearer perfect beauty than emma altogether face and figure ?
and with such good-will on frank churchill’s part , that the space which a quarter of an hour before had been deemed barely sufficient for five couple , was now endeavoured to be made out quite enough for ten .
mr knightley looked as if he were more gratified than he cared to express ;
what happiness it must be to her good old grandmother and excellent aunt , when she comes to visit them !
mrs weston told me you were here .
harriet had no penetration .
she could have made an inquiry or two , as to the expedition and the expense of the irish mails ;
it would be dreadful to be standing so close !
i never knew days fly so fast .
she had many acquaintance in the place , for her father was universally civil , but not one among them who could be accepted in lieu of miss taylor for even half a day .
dear ;
i must think your statement by no means fair .
“ dear affectionate creature !
with their wealth , their views increased ;
how very differently we feel !
how is mr woodhouse ?
how cheerful , how animated , how suspicious , how busy their imaginations all are !
“ yes what should hurt me ?
for , beyond a doubt , mr elton had not his equal for beauty or agreeableness .
she was happy , she knew she was happy , and knew she ought to be happy .
” said john knightley .
“ almost every moment .
“ oh !
it made her animated open hearted she voluntarily said ;
but , as you made no objection , i never did it again .
he had frightened her a little about mr elton ;
“ well , miss woodhouse !
my mother says the orchard was always famous in her younger days .
and when they did meet , his grave looks shewed that she was not forgiven .
“ aye like maple grove , i dare say .
she meant to be very happy , in spite of the scene being laid at mr cole’s ;
instead of drawing his brother off to a window while they waited for dinner , he was talking to miss fairfax .
but they always do , you know .
and mr knightley thought he saw another collection of letters anxiously pushed towards her , and resolutely swept away by her unexamined .
she checked herself , however , and submitted quietly to a little more praise than she deserved .
and though the effect was agreeable , the ill-will which produced it was necessarily increasing emma’s dislike .
i am only afraid of your sitting up for me .
no , it was long enough , broad enough , handsome enough .
they shall talk .
she is not a clever girl , but she has better sense than you are aware of , and does not deserve to have her understanding spoken of so slightingly .
“ you , emma , who have so few opportunities of dancing , you are really out of luck ;
“ oh !
the laurels at maple grove are in the same profusion as here , and stand very much in the same way just across the lawn ;
she was the first to announce it to mr knightley ;
i need not tell you what is to be done .
many a time has selina said , when she has been going to bristol , i really cannot get this girl to move from the house .
“ but as it seems a matter of justice , it shall be done .
mr churchill had made a point of it , as a token of respect to the wife he had so very recently lost ;
he had joined mr knightley at a little distance , and was arranging himself for settled conversation , while smiles of high glee passed between him and his wife .
that it would not have been so resolutely encountered but in full expectation of hearing from some one very dear , and that it had not been in vain .
his ostensible reason , however , was to ask whether mr woodhouse’s party could be made up in the evening without him , or whether he should be in the smallest degree necessary at hartfield .
words , conduct , discretion , and indiscretion , told the same story .
mr churchill , oh !
this , you know , speaks a great degree of weakness but now she is so impatient to be in town , that she means to sleep only two nights on the road .
as an old friend , you will allow me to hope , miss fairfax , that ten years hence you may have as many concentrated objects as i have .
on his side were the inquiries , “ was she a horsewoman ?
“ emma never thinks of herself , if she can do good to others , ” rejoined mr woodhouse , understanding but in part .
she was not less pleased another day with the manner in which he seconded a sudden wish of hers , to have harriet’s picture .
his importance at enscombe was very evident .
and , therefore , i say that if you should still be in this country when mr martin marries , i wish you may not be drawn in by your intimacy with the sisters , to be acquainted with the wife , who will probably be some mere farmer’s daughter , without education .
the wedding was no distant event , as the parties had only themselves to please , and nothing but the necessary preparations to wait for ;
the room she always has ;
“ yes , i have no doubt of her being extremely attached to him .
and not only was there time for these convictions , with all their glow of attendant happiness ;
he fancied bathing might be good for it the warm bath but she says it did him no lasting benefit .
from the expense of the child , however , he was soon relieved .
“ now , ” said harriet , “ you must recollect .
this is just what i wanted to be assured of .
but after all the punishment that misconduct can bring , it is still not less misconduct .
i thought her even cold .
his indifference to a confusion of rank , bordered too much on inelegance of mind .
what a dreadful loss to you both !
she liked his open manners , but a little less of open-heartedness would have made him a higher character .
“ thank you .
there is no understanding a word of it .
“ i have no doubt of their being happy together , ” said emma ;
miss woodhouse , why are you always so right ?
but my mother , and jane , and i , were all there , and a very agreeable evening we had .
not too strongly for the offence but far , far too strongly to issue from any feeling softer than upright justice and clear-sighted goodwill .
i should like to see two more here , your pretty little friend , miss smith , and my son and then i should say we were quite complete .
i doubted it more the next day on box hill ;
he does not care about jane fairfax .
“ mr weston would undoubtedly support me , if he were here , for he thinks exactly as i do on the subject .
but i shall want the ribbon directly so it had better go to hartfield at least the ribbon .
he would either have gloried in the achievement , or been ashamed of it .
he could be no judge , however , of the evil he was holding cheap .
we copied it from the elegant extracts .
“ very like maple grove indeed !
i am no dancer .
he might be superseded by another ;
but what did such particulars explain ?
nothing so easy as for a young lady to raise her expectations too high .
she wanted me to nurse my cold by staying at home to-day , and yet will not promise to avoid the danger of catching an ulcerated sore throat herself .
then here is my last , ” unclosing a pretty sketch of a gentleman in small size , whole-length “ my last and my best my brother , mr john knightley .
she and mr frank churchill had been at weymouth at the same time .
i have often talked to her a good deal .
it is the greatest absurdity actually snowing at this moment !
“ i do not find myself making any use of the word sacrifice , ” said she .
for my mother was so afraid that we had not any salting-pan large enough .
it was a private resolution of hers , not communicated to him or at least not communicated in a way to carry conviction .
i really believe , if she had only a shilling in the world , she would be very likely to give away sixpence of it ;
think she must of the possible difference to the poor little boy ;
they remained but a few minutes together , as miss woodhouse must not be kept waiting ;
and i shall call on miss bates in my way home .
that she will not be continually detailing her magnificent intentions , from the procuring her a permanent situation to the including her in those delightful exploring parties which are to take place in the barouche-landau .
i do not know which .
poor old mrs bates , civil and humble as usual , looked as if she did not quite understand what was going on .
for , having no female connexions of his own , there had been only isabella whose claims could be compared with hers , and she had always known exactly how far he loved and esteemed isabella .
acknowledged that he had heard many people say the same but yet he must confess , that to him nothing could make amends for the want of the fine glow of health .
but it was very natural , you know , that he should like to speak of his own place while he was paying his addresses and as jane used to be very often walking out with them for colonel and mrs campbell were very particular about their daughter’s not walking out often with only mr dixon , for which i do not at all blame them ;
but of that , unfortunately , there could be no chance .
my mother is delightfully well ;
she could not but hear ;
brought him yet stronger suspicion of there being a something of private liking , of private understanding even , between frank churchill and jane .
“ but , my dear papa , it is supposed to be summer ;
“ the crown !
you do nothing .
but as she wanted to be drawing , the declaration must wait a little longer .
but you will soon overcome all that part of her reserve which ought to be overcome , all that has its foundation in diffidence .
“ oh !
what a blessing it is , when undue influence does not survive the grave !
the last night’s ball seemed lost in the gipsies .
before this time last year i assure you we had had a delightful exploring party from maple grove to kings weston .
every letter from her is read forty times over ;
heaven forbid !
some people were always cross when they were hot .
if mr and mrs weston will be so obliging as to call here one morning , we may talk it over , and see what can be done .
there could be no harm in a scheme , a mere passive scheme .
to emma’s entreaties and assurances succeeded mr knightley’s , whose fond praise of her gave the subject even a kind of welcome ;
“ oh !
she felt it at her heart .
how eager he had been about the picture !
to that point went every leisure moment which her father’s claims on her allowed , and every moment of involuntary absence of mind .
but one cannot comprehend a young man’s being under such restraint , as not to be able to spend a week with his father , if he likes it .
“ oh !
i did not quite like your looks on tuesday , but it was an ungenial morning ;
mr knightley and harriet smith !
emma looked graciously .
and mrs weston is so anxious to be acquainted with him , that she must be almost as happy as yourself .
in no other light could you have been more to me than a common acquaintance .
frank churchill placed a word before miss fairfax .
to him who has , it might not be so easy to burst forth at once into perfect independence , and set all their claims on his gratitude and regard at nought .
i could suppose she might in time but can she already ?
emma , i must tell you what you will not ask , though i may wish it unsaid the next moment .
i was so astonished when she first told me what she had been saying to mrs elton , and when mrs elton at the same moment came congratulating me upon it !
it was not unlikely , she thought , that she might see mr knightley in her way ;
just the trifling , silly fellow i took him for .
now she could talk , and she could listen with true happiness , unchecked by that sense of injustice , of guilt , of something most painful , which had haunted her when remembering how disappointed a heart was near her , how much might at that moment , and at a little distance , be enduring by the feelings which she had led astray herself .
mr suckling , who has been eleven years a resident at maple grove , and whose father had it before him i believe , at least i am almost sure that old mr suckling had completed the purchase before his death .
but it was a black morning’s work for her .
“ i cannot agree with you .
i can imagine , that if you , as you are , mr knightley , were to be transported and placed all at once in mr frank churchill’s situation , you would be able to say and do just what you have been recommending for him ;
but between us , i am convinced there never can be any likeness , except in being unmarried .
i shall have no difficulty , i suppose , in finding the house ;
it would amuse away the difficulties of her part , and lessen the irksomeness of miss smith’s .
the whole party were assembled , excepting frank churchill , who was expected every moment from richmond ;
but i had put my huswife upon it , you see , without being aware , and so it was quite hid , but i had it in my hand so very lately that i was almost sure it must be on the table .
and that you should have been so mistaken , is amazing !
he found he could not be useful , and his feelings were too much irritated for talking .
“ but the imprudence of such a match !
yes , i must be there ;
“ that has been a good deal the case , my dear ;
(in a tone of wonder and pity ,) i had no idea that the law had been so great a slavery .
“ we will make your apologies to mr and mrs weston .
“ this was settled last night , and frank was off with the light this morning .
a moment sufficed to convince her that something extraordinary had happened .
she spoke as she felt , with earnest regret and solicitude sincerely wishing that the circumstances which she collected from miss bates to be now actually determined on , might be as much for miss fairfax’s advantage and comfort as possible .
but you see , every thing turns out for the best .
my dear , but perry had many doubts about the sea doing her any good ;
and in this state of swelling resentment , and mutually deep mortification , they had to continue together a few minutes longer , for the fears of mr woodhouse had confined them to a foot-pace .
yes , i always like news .
“ upon my word it is , miss bates .
and going on horseback , which she knew would be all very bad ;
” asked mr knightley .
but she struggled , and let it pass .
but the wonder of it was very soon nothing ;
and having so much to ask and to say as to tone , touch , and pedal , totally unsuspicious of that wish of saying as little about it as possible , which she plainly read in the fair heroine’s countenance .
my dear emma , your own good sense could not endure such a puppy when it came to the point .
he only wanted to aggrandise and enrich himself ;
and blushed to think how much truer a knowledge of his character had been there shewn than any she had reached herself .
the plan was that she should be brought up for educating others ;
his good-nature , his humanity , as i tell you , would be quite enough to account for the horses .
emma thanked him , but could not allow of his disappointing his friend on their account ;
you and mr elton are one as clever as the other .
“ that fellow , ” said he , indignantly , “ thinks of nothing but shewing off his own voice .
the cold , however , was severe ;
her observation had been pretty correct .
you said you had a great many , and now you have not one left .
emma had never been to box hill ;
“ no , my dear , ” said her father instantly ;
and now , poor old man , he is bed-ridden , and very poorly with the rheumatic gout in his joints i must go and see him to-day ;
skilful has been the hand !
mr john knightley must be in town again on the 28th , and we ought to be thankful , papa , that we are to have the whole of the time they can give to the country , that two or three days are not to be taken out for the abbey .
had she intended ever to marry him , it might have been worth while to pause and consider , and try to understand the value of his preference , and the character of his temper ;
“ what felicity it is to hear a tune again which has made one happy !
“ you spent the evening with mrs elton ?
let him but continue the same mr knightley to her and her father , the same mr knightley to all the world ;
she had never seen frank churchill so silent and stupid .
but as it was not the tyrannic influence of youth on youth , it had not shaken his determination of never settling till he could purchase randalls , and the sale of randalls was long looked forward to ;
not that i presume to insinuate , however , that some people may not think you perfection already .
such delicacy !
“ isabella and emma both write beautifully , ” said mr woodhouse ;
and if she could not exult in her dignity and grace , she could not only love the blooming sweetness and the artless manner , but could most heartily rejoice in that light , cheerful , unsentimental disposition which allowed her so many alleviations of pleasure , in the midst of the pangs of disappointed affection .
can you think your friend behindhand in these sort of considerations ?
i was reading it to mrs cole , and since she went away , i was reading it again to my mother , for it is such a pleasure to her a letter from jane that she can never hear it often enough ;
mr knightley might quarrel with her , but emma could not quarrel with herself .
the introduction must be unpleasant , whenever it takes place ;
“ the sooner every party breaks up , the better .
she might never have thought of him but for me ;
“ i believe it is very true , my dear , indeed , ” said mr woodhouse , with a sigh .
that she was not immediately ready , emma did suspect to arise from the state of her nerves ;
emma had not to listen to such paradings again to any so exclusively addressed to herself so disgustingly decorated with a “ dear miss woodhouse .
neither of them thought but of mr knightley and themselves .
but in coming home i felt i might do any thing .
it is remarkable , that emma , in the many , very many , points of view in which she was now beginning to consider donwell abbey , was never struck with any sense of injury to her nephew henry , whose rights as heir-expectant had formerly been so tenaciously regarded .
but when a beginning is made when the felicities of rapid motion have once been , though slightly , felt it must be a very heavy set that does not ask for more .
mr knightley , in fact , was one of the few people who could see faults in emma woodhouse , and the only one who ever told her of them :
had the same behaviour continued , miss smith might have been led into a misconception of your views ;
how very odd !
but you are too good for that , i am sure .
“ i have heard him lamenting her having no instrument repeatedly ;
much , much beyond impropriety !
emma , i had not thought it possible .
mr weston , tell me at once .
i assure you i think she has very extraordinary talents .
oh !
you might be very much at a loss , and it is a very dirty walk , unless you keep on the footpath ;
assured of the love of such a woman the disinterested love , for jane fairfax’s character vouches for her disinterestedness ;
i make no inquiry myself , and should be sorry to have any made by my friends .
you must not confound us with london in general , my dear sir .
“ i dare say she had .
“ one can suppose nothing else , ” added mrs cole , “ and i was only surprized that there could ever have been a doubt .
some minutes passed in this unpleasant silence , with only one attempt on emma’s side to talk of the weather , but he made no answer .
nothing wrong in him escaped her .
but fetch them both .
“ where is the young man ?
and emma soon saw him standing before miss fairfax , and talking to her ;
they want her (mr and mrs dixon) excessively to come over with colonel and mrs campbell ;
i hate the recollection .
mrs weston would speak to her , with a degree of unreserve which she would not hazard with isabella ;
no there is nothing to surprize one at all .
mr weston seems an excellent creature quite a first-rate favourite with me already , i assure you .
emma could not bear to give him pain .
mr perry recommended nourishing food ;
it was now about the time that she was likely to call .
do not we rather surpass your expectations ?
certainly she had often , especially of late , thought his manners to herself unnecessarily gallant ;
do not mimic her .
miss taylor , if you had not married , you would have staid at home with me .
it may make many things intelligible and excusable which now are not to be understood .
and her situation is so calculated to affect one !
i was afraid there could be little chance of my hearing any thing of miss fairfax to-day .
it is not likely you should ever have observed him ;
but in herself , i assure you , she is an upstart .
in this state of schemes , and hopes , and connivance , june opened upon hartfield .
i was telling you of your grandmama , jane , there was a little disappointment .
“ yes , very true .
but , by giving her an education , he hoped to be supplying the means of respectable subsistence hereafter .
i do not like strange voices ;
besides the eltons , it must be the westons and mr knightley ;
emma said it would be awkward ;
this is three times as large .
from that evening , or at least from the time of miss woodhouse’s encouraging her to think of him , harriet had begun to be sensible of his talking to her much more than he had been used to do , and of his having indeed quite a different manner towards her ;
i give you this caution now , because i shall never speak to you again on the subject .
what !
i give you notice that as i find your son , so i shall judge of him .
“ the ladies were all at home .
he had not come to the point .
hating change of every kind .
a very friendly inquiry after miss fairfax , she hoped , might lead the way to a return of old feelings .
he had despaired at one period ;
these were very cheering thoughts ;
very well .
and harriet then came running to her with a smiling face , and in a flutter of spirits , which miss woodhouse hoped very soon to compose .
“ here is april come !
but it seemed to her reasonable that at harriet’s age , and with the entire extinction of all hope , such a progress might be made towards a state of composure by the time of mr elton’s return , as to allow them all to meet again in the common routine of acquaintance , without any danger of betraying sentiments or increasing them .
mr woodhouse was almost as much interested in the business as the girls , and tried very often to recollect something worth their putting in .
and as their acquaintance increased , so did their satisfaction in each other .
she never could have deserved him and nobody but so partial and kind a friend as miss woodhouse would have thought it possible .
if he had never esteemed my opinion before , he would have thought highly of me then ;
it was her superior duty .
and i make so light of it now to her , that she does not think much about it .
and only too palpably desirable , natural , and probable , for her to have much merit in planning it .
and certainly never would have thought of him with hope , if i had not assured her of his attachment , for she is as modest and humble as i used to think him .
but (with a reproachful smile at emma) she receives attentions from mrs elton , which nobody else pays her .
the fear of being still unwelcome , determined her , though assured of their being at home , to wait in the passage , and send up her name .
“ insufferable woman !
a nervous seizure , which had lasted some hours and he had quite given up every thought of coming , till very late ;
dining once with the coles and having a ball talked of , which never took place .
she had often observed the change , to almost the same extent .
nothing could be pleasanter .
it is just what i used to say to a certain gentleman in company in the days of courtship , when , because things did not go quite right , did not proceed with all the rapidity which suited his feelings , he was apt to be in despair , and exclaim that he was sure at this rate it would be may before hymen’s saffron robe would be put on for us .
but i assure you you are quite mistaken .
it is very small and delicate hartfield pork is not like any other pork but still it is pork and , my dear emma , unless one could be sure of their making it into steaks , nicely fried , as ours are fried , without the smallest grease , and not roast it , for no stomach can bear roast pork i think we had better send the leg do not you think so , my dear ?
and she could now invite the very person whom she really wanted to make the eighth , jane fairfax .
in all probability she was at this very time waited for there ;
quite depend upon it ;
he is desperately in love and means to marry her .
she never stopt till she had gone through the whole ;
she brought no name , no blood , no alliance .
mr weston was musing .
“ i never should have presumed to think of it at first , ” said she , “ but for you .
i do not know when i have been so disappointed .
you laugh at me about william larkins ;
harriet turned away ;
i made the best excuses i could for not having been able to wait on him and mrs elton on this happy occasion ;
men of family would not be very fond of connecting themselves with a girl of such obscurity and most prudent men would be afraid of the inconvenience and disgrace they might be involved in , when the mystery of her parentage came to be revealed .
after this speech he was gone as soon as possible .
it was all read , however , steadily , attentively , and without the smallest remark ;
to me , of drawing or music ;
“ you like it , my emma , as little as i feared .
isabella turned to mrs weston for her approbation of the plan .
one thing only was wanting to make the prospect of the ball completely satisfactory to emma its being fixed for a day within the granted term of frank churchill’s stay in surry ;
this was all that was generally known of her history .
you are always with me .
“ but , in spite of all her friends’ urgency , and her own wish of seeing ireland , miss fairfax prefers devoting the time to you and mrs bates ?
my dear harriet , what are you thinking of ?
i am sure i do not know who is not .
some might think him , and others might think her , the most in luck .
“ oh !
at last emma attacked her on another ground .
you are very kind .
” even mr weston shook his head , and looked solemn , and said , “ ah !
but confess , emma , that you did want him to marry harriet .
to send me on here , to be an encumbrance to my friends , so long before you vouchsafe to come !
for harriet every thing .
she would not take a denial .
satisfied with proving myself your friend by very faithful counsel , and trusting that you will some time or other do me greater justice than you can do now .
a sudden seizure of a different nature from any thing foreboded by her general state , had carried her off after a short struggle .
“ i am not speaking of its prudence ;
emma was ready for her visitor some time before he appeared ;
“ let us think of those among our absent friends who are more cheerfully employed , ” cried emma .
“ but still , not near enough to give me a chance of being right , if we think differently .
and she had herself the highest value for elegance .
now will be the time .
“ no , ” said emma , laughing ;
dinners at mr cole’s , or balls at the crown .
though he might constrain himself , while the ladies were comfortably clearing the nicer things , to say :
it was a very useful note , for it supplied them with fresh matter for thought and conversation during the rest of their lonely evening .
how little did i think !
no , you shall send it to hartfield , if you please .
i hardly know how it has happened ;
what am i to do ?
yes , quite a proposal of marriage ;
here ceased the concert part of the evening , for miss woodhouse and miss fairfax were the only young lady performers ;
i suppose i smile for pleasure at colonel campbell’s being so rich and so liberal .
when a gallant young man , like mr frank churchill , ” said mr knightley dryly , “ writes to a fair lady like miss woodhouse , he will , of course , put forth his best .
for miss , read miss smith .
“ three o’clock yesterday !
“ very true , miss woodhouse , so she will .
shall we walk , augusta ?
“ i will answer for it , that mine thinks herself full as clever , and would spurn any body’s assistance .
“ thank you .
she had been often remiss , her conscience told her so ;
we think she is the better for highbury already .
this is a connexion which offers nothing but good .
mrs elton was first seen at church :
in order to assist a concealment so essential to me , i was led on to make more than an allowable use of the sort of intimacy into which we were immediately thrown .
i would have her understand me .
how that visit was to be acknowledged what would be necessary and what might be safest , had been a point of some doubtful consideration .
after such behaviour , as i have witnessed during the last month , to miss smith such attentions as i have been in the daily habit of observing to be addressing me in this manner this is an unsteadiness of character , indeed , which i had not supposed possible !
“ oh !
for , not being within when he called the other day , i had never seen him before ;
they never occurred but for her own convenience .
“ jane fairfax is absolutely charming , miss woodhouse .
emma soon recollected , and understood him ;
upon my word , jane on one arm , and me on the other !
” said mrs weston , “ have not you finished it yet ?
in spite of all her faults , she knew she was dear to him ;
will not it be a good plan ?
and i felt it impossible not to wait till she came in .
no , i would not be the means of giving them any pain .
could i mention any thing more fit to be done , than to go to mrs goddard ?
they must all dine at randalls one day ;
he was talking to mrs cole he was looking on unconcerned ;
i must have given you up .
i rather believe you are giving me more credit for acuteness than i deserve .
she need not trouble herself to pity him .
when we dress the leg it will be another thing .
you are prettily shod for walking home , i dare say .
“ she is a sort of elegant creature that one cannot keep one’s eyes from .
it was by no means his daughter’s wish that the intellects of highbury in general should be put under requisition .
“ emma has been meaning to read more ever since she was twelve years old .
that there was no young mrs martin , no wife in the case ;
never had his smile been stronger , nor his eyes more exulting than when he next looked at her .
in them lay the tormenting ideas which emma could not get rid of , and which constituted the real misery of the business to her .
a separation for the present ;
probably reflecting on what she had said , and trying to understand the manner .
” cried miss bates .
we have been children and women together ;
leave all that to me .
“ no mrs knightley ;
mr perry walking hastily by , mr william cox letting himself in at the office-door , mr cole’s carriage-horses returning from exercise , or a stray letter-boy on an obstinate mule , were the liveliest objects she could presume to expect ;
but when she is gone home , i am afraid you will be sitting up by yourself , instead of going to bed at your usual time and the idea of that would entirely destroy my comfort .
where emma errs once , she is in the right a hundred times .
what is this ?
such delightful proofs of hartfield’s attraction , as those sort of visits conveyed , might shortly be over .
it had a most favourable aspect ;
i mean , as to being acquainted with his wife for though his sisters , from a superior education , are not to be altogether objected to , it does not follow that he might marry any body at all fit for you to notice .
isabella was too much like emma differing only in those striking inferiorities , which always brought the other in brilliancy before him , for much to have been done , even had his time been longer .
“ the expression of the eye is most correct , but miss smith has not those eyebrows and eyelashes .
the quietness of the game made it particularly eligible for mr woodhouse , who had often been distressed by the more animated sort , which mr weston had occasionally introduced , and who now sat happily occupied in lamenting , with tender melancholy , over the departure of the “ poor little boys , ” or in fondly pointing out , as he took up any stray letter near him , how beautifully emma had written it .
and emma would then resign her place to miss fairfax , whose performance , both vocal and instrumental , she never could attempt to conceal from herself , was infinitely superior to her own .
i walk fast .
for , as to her friend’s approbation , emma had instantly removed every fear of that nature , by meeting her with the most unqualified congratulations .
a young farmer , whether on horseback or on foot , is the very last sort of person to raise my curiosity .
she sat still , she walked about , she tried her own room , she tried the shrubbery in every place , every posture , she perceived that she had acted most weakly ;
the yeomanry are precisely the order of people with whom i feel i can have nothing to do .
but still , he cannot refuse an invitation , he must dine out wherever he is asked .
amazing luck in some of her throws :
and regret , in a reasonable way , that he should be so late .
there will be the leg to be salted , you know , which is so very nice , and the loin to be dressed directly in any manner they like .
it is so with some men .
and ever since she was twelve , emma has been mistress of the house and of you all .
every body knows mrs churchill , ” replied isabella :
if you remember any queernesses , set them all to the right account .
the two other gentlemen waited at the door to let her pass .
“ indeed !
my mother’s are really very good indeed .
nothing was wanting but to be happy when they got there .
if i had been there , i think i should have made some discoveries .
but the sensations which could prompt such behaviour sunk them both very much .
and at weymouth we were very much in the same set .
it was for him .
you need not be afraid of unwholesome preserves here .
and i thought it a very strong proof .
it struck her with dreadful force , and she was ready to give it every bad name in the world .
oh !
and that she was perfectly free from any tendency to being attached to me , was as much my conviction as my wish .
and i think the sooner you go the better .
“ and , moreover , if you must go to the sea , it had better not have been to south end .
but it may be inferred .
the door between them was open , and emma passed into it with the housekeeper to receive her assistance in the most comfortable manner .
“ oh !
“ you get upon delicate subjects , emma , ” said mrs weston smiling ;
i think it admirable ;
for she is to be three months with us at least .
the possibility of the young man’s coming to mrs goddard’s that morning , and meeting with harriet and pleading his own cause , gave alarming ideas .
of what sort ?
i am thwarted in every thing material .
but yet i think there was something wanting .
it is a retired place .
“ these are the sights , harriet , to do one good .
she dearly loved her father , but he was no companion for her .
mr knightley had done all in his power for mr woodhouse’s entertainment .
i quite rave about jane fairfax .
a charming place , undoubtedly .
call upon her , by all means .
i do not know what she meant , but she asked me if i thought i should go and stay there again next summer .
she was not a woman of strong understanding or any quickness ;
kitty , a fair but frozen maid .
mine , i confess , are exhausted .
i am always glad to see him .
it cannot be long , i think , before she comes .
that she had never been admitted into miss fairfax’s confidence on this important matter which was most probable still , in knowing her as she ought , and as she might , she must have been preserved from the abominable suspicions of an improper attachment to mr dixon , which she had not only so foolishly fashioned and harboured herself , but had so unpardonably imparted ;
as soon as mrs weston was sufficiently recovered to admit mr woodhouse’s visits , emma having it in view that her gentle reasonings should be employed in the cause , resolved first to announce it at home , and then at randalls .
and the house was modern and well-built .
had not mrs weston any letter about her to produce ?
well , what do you say to it ?
and the shadow of authority being now long passed away , they had been living together as friend and friend very mutually attached , and emma doing just what she liked ;
and when he came to be contrasted with gentlemen , she thought he must lose all the ground he had gained in harriet’s inclination .
it shews it to have been so thoroughly from the heart .
let me hear any thing rather than what you are all thinking of .
on the other the two mr knightleys ;
i knew you would wish it .
i would give any money for it .
“ pretty well , my dear i hope pretty well .
“ poor comfort !
i dare say he has ;
i will take it home with me at night .
she has qualities which may be trusted ;
“ the arrival of this pianoforte is decisive with me .
mr woodhouse very soon followed them into the drawing-room .
no ;
“ you are right .
mr weston , with triumph of a different sort , was confessing that he had known it to be snowing some time , but had not said a word , lest it should make mr woodhouse uncomfortable , and be an excuse for his hurrying away .
and as for mrs hodges , wright holds her very cheap indeed .
miss woodhouse , what can we do about that ?
“ you were speaking , ” said he , gravely .
you will never go to swisserland .
mr knightley promises to give up his claim this christmas though you know it is longer since they were with him , than with us .
and miss woodhouse looks as if she could almost say the same .
james could take the note .
every friend of miss taylor must be glad to have her so happily married .
the day came , the party were punctually assembled , and mr john knightley seemed early to devote himself to the business of being agreeable .
“ i rather hope to satisfy you both , ” said emma , “ for i shall do all in my power to make them happy , which will be enough for isabella ;
but ah !
and had walked up directly after dinner , to see how this sweetest and best of all creatures , faultless in spite of all her faults , bore the discovery .
do the children grow ?
next week .
but there was an air of foppery and nonsense in it which she could not approve .
i dream of every body at highbury when i am away and when i have gone through my particular friends , then i begin dreaming of mr and mrs perry .
my dear ,’ said i , i shall say you are laid down upon the bed :’ but , however , she is not ;
and not only losing the right lady , but finding himself debased to the level of a very wrong one .
“ robert martin’s manners have sense , sincerity , and good-humour to recommend them ;
“ i honour his sincerity .
but she saw too much of it to feel a doubt of its overcoming any hesitations that a reasonable prudence might originally suggest ;
“ it is impossible that emma should not miss such a companion , ” said mr knightley .
the longer she considered it , the greater was her sense of its expediency .
the son approached her with a cheerful eagerness which marked her as his peculiar object , and at dinner she found him seated by her and , as she firmly believed , not without some dexterity on his side .
to take her be it only an hour or two from her aunt , to give her change of air and scene , and quiet rational conversation , even for an hour or two , might do her good ;
and the devil of a temper .
and every body says the same obliging things .
but she had the comfort of appearing very polite , while feeling very cross and of thinking that the rest of the visit could not possibly pass without bringing forward the same information again , or the substance of it , from the open-hearted mr weston .
but where , as in this case , though the conduct is mistaken , the feelings are not , it may not be very material .
“ it is a great pleasure where one can indulge in it , ” said the young man , “ though there are not many houses that i should presume on so far ;
(in an accent meant to be insinuating) i am sure you have seen and understood me .
if i find him conversable , i shall be glad of his acquaintance ;
and yet by their manners they evidently think themselves equal even to my brother , mr suckling , who happens to be one of their nearest neighbours .
from that moment , emma could have taken her oath that mr knightley had had no concern in giving the instrument .
it darted through her , with the speed of an arrow , that mr knightley must marry no one but herself !
they met readily and smiling , but with a consciousness which at first allowed little to be said ;
there is no likeness at all .
matrimony , as the origin of change , was always disagreeable ;
i am sure nobody ought to be , or can be , a greater advocate for matrimony than i am ;
and there was some satisfaction in considering with what self-denying , generous friendship she had always wished and promoted the match ;
and he entered the room with such an agreeable smile as certified the continuance of the scheme .
dearer , much dearer than ever .’ i hope he may long continue to feel all the value of such a reconciliation .
i who have never seen it !
the others had been talking of the child , mrs weston giving an account of a little alarm she had been under , the evening before , from the infant’s appearing not quite well .
the black mare was blameless ;
mrs weston looked up , afraid to believe ;
they were invited , were not they ?
“ nothing at all .
if it be not inconvenient to you , pray let us go in , that i may prove myself to belong to the place , to be a true citizen of highbury .
but soon (within five minutes) the proposal of dancing originating nobody exactly knew where was so effectually promoted by mr and mrs cole , that every thing was rapidly clearing away , to give proper space .
is perry going to set up his carriage , frank ?
what do you imagine his age to be ?
only three of us .
“ i am not fond of dinner-visiting , ” said he “ i never was .
“ yes ;
in a few minutes the carriage returned .
but she had resolution enough to refrain from making any answer at all .
emma knew that he was now getting to the box hill party , and grew uncomfortable .
“ it is not to be conceived that a man of three or four-and-twenty should not have liberty of mind or limb to that amount .
” highbury , with mrs weston , stood for hartfield ;
“ can you come to randalls at any time this morning ?
she was quite determined not to utter a word that should hurt jane fairfax’s feelings ;
part of her meaning was to conceal some favourite thoughts of her own and mr weston’s on the subject , as much as possible .
“ oh !
i am sure she will be here presently .
such talent as hers must not be suffered to remain unknown .
apologies for her seemingly ungracious silence in their first reception , and the warmest expressions of the gratitude she was always feeling towards herself and mr weston , must necessarily open the cause ;
they went in ;
this was all very promising ;
and i had not got three yards from the door , when he came after me , only to say , if i was going to hartfield , he thought i had much better go round by mr cole’s stables , for i should find the near way quite floated by this rain .
the man who fetches our letters every morning (one of our men , i forget his name) shall inquire for yours too and bring them to you .
but his gaiety did not meet hers .
i must still add to this long letter .
“ just as they always do very vulgar .
oh !
she did it all herself .
and he had gained her with such delightful rapidity the first hour of introduction had been so very soon followed by distinguishing notice ;
and as you were the person slighted , you will forgive me instantly ;
what years of felicity that man , in all human calculation , has before him !
but yet , this is such a situation as she cannot feel herself justified in declining .
“ oh !
and i will answer for your thinking better and better of him as you know him more .
“ but you must have found it very damp and dirty .
frank was standing by her , but not steadily ;
and mrs weston’s accounting for it with “ i suppose they will not take the liberty with you ;
i could very ill be spared but such a point had been made of my coming !
dear , miss woodhouse well , at last , i fancy , he looked round and saw me ;
“ what a precious deposit !
i cannot keep my eyes from it .
emma soon saw that her companion was not in the happiest humour .
and if she were not to feel this disappointment so very much , i am sure i have not an idea of any body else who would be at all desirable for her ;
“ i hope you will bring elton , ” said he :
that in living constantly with her father , and in no house of his own , there would be much , very much , to be borne with .
the shop first in size and fashion in the place .
i cannot compliment you .
he knows the value of a good income as well as any body .
and such a league in secret to judge us all !
nay , that they have been long engaged !
and i dare say she was very much pleased with you .
the advantages of bath to the young are pretty generally understood .
but they had a very interesting parley about what could be done and should be done .
with mixed feelings , she seated herself at a little distance from the numbers round the instrument , to listen .
and then i tell her , i am sure she would contrive to make it out herself , if she had nobody to do it for her every word of it i am sure she would pore over it till she had made out every word .
harriet was standing at one of the windows .
it makes me envious and miserable ;
but what can any body’s native air do for them in the months of january , february , and march ?
for his attachment , she must believe to be produced only by a consciousness of harriet’s ;
but it is impossible not to feel uneasiness .
mr elton was the only one whose assistance she asked .
“ oh !
i was tempted by his attentions , and allowed myself to appear pleased .
and if we do come to any thing very bad , i can get out and walk .
so that mrs elton’s praise passed from one mouth to another as it ought to do , unimpeded by miss woodhouse , who readily continued her first contribution and talked with a good grace of her being “ very pleasant and very elegantly dressed .
the intermediate month was the one fixed on , as far as they dared , by emma and mr knightley .
he got as near as he could to thanking her for miss taylor’s merits , without seeming quite to forget that in the common course of things it was to be rather supposed that miss taylor had formed miss woodhouse’s character , than miss woodhouse miss taylor’s .
“ john does not even mention your friend , ” said mr knightley .
she was evidently displeased ;
but there was more indistinctness in the causes of her’s , than in his .
emma was sadly fearful that this second disappointment would be more severe than the first .
mrs smallridge , a most delightful woman !
you will look back and see that i did not come till miss fairfax was in highbury ;
the unhappiness produced by the knowledge of that engagement had been a little put aside by elizabeth martin’s calling at mrs goddard’s a few days afterwards .
the impossibility of her quitting her father , mr knightley felt as strongly as herself ;
he began speaking of harriet , and speaking of her with more voluntary praise than emma had ever heard before .
and emma had the advantage of hearing her own silly compliment repeated twice over before the good old lady could comprehend it .
mr knightley , who had nothing of ceremony about him , was offering by his short , decided answers , an amusing contrast to the protracted apologies and civil hesitations of the other .
do not you recollect ?
sixty-five miles farther than from maple grove to london .
they seem very comfortable as they are , and if she were to take any pains to marry him , she would probably repent it .
.
all , except your saving this relic i knew nothing of that till this moment but the cutting the finger , and my recommending court-plaister , and saying i had none about me !
and in the first place had wished not to go at all at present , to be allowed merely to write to miss fairfax instead , and to defer this ceremonious call till a little time had passed , and mr churchill could be reconciled to the engagement’s becoming known ;
knightley is quite the gentleman .
nothing could be more proper or pleasing than his whole manner to her nothing could more agreeably denote his wish of considering her as a friend and securing her affection .
certainly i had been accustomed to every luxury at maple grove ;
her person was rather good ;
i know that i must have disgusted you .
what is it ?
emma knew that he had , on that occasion , found her much superior to his expectation .
that considering the service he had rendered you , it was extremely natural :
merely looked , and bowed in submission ;
she had no objection .
it is not every body that would have stood out in such a kind way as she did , and refuse to take jane’s answer ;
“ well done , mrs martin !
” ford’s was the principal woollen-draper , linen-draper , and haberdasher’s shop united ;
“ ungrateful !
i do suspect he would not have had a pair of horses for himself , and that it was only as an excuse for assisting them .
she had had three weeks of happy exemption from mr elton ;
had he begun as he ought , there would have been no difficulty now .
emma heard the sad truth with fortitude .
he might observe that it was so .
for i am never happy but at hartfield .
i do not advise the custard .
it was short , but expressed good sense , warm attachment , liberality , propriety , even delicacy of feeling .
to hartfield , if you please , mrs ford .
“ if i had not persuaded harriet into liking the man , i could have borne any thing .
nothing incomplete .
and the campbells , whatever might be their motive or motives , whether single , or double , or treble , gave the arrangement their ready sanction , and said , that they depended more on a few months spent in her native air , for the recovery of her health , than on any thing else .
i really do not think there will .
perfect , in being much too short .
every other part of her mind was disgusting .
“ she had set out from mrs goddard’s half an hour ago she had been afraid it would rain she had been afraid it would pour down every moment but she thought she might get to hartfield first she had hurried on as fast as possible ;
and the same loneliness , and the same melancholy , seemed to reign at hartfield but in the afternoon it cleared ;
“ and , in return for your acknowledging so much , i will do you the justice to say , that you would have chosen for him better than he has chosen for himself .
there it would have been all enjoyment .
you hear nothing but truth from me .
“ nay , dear emma , now i must take his part ;
the clouds were carried off ;
you will be adored in highbury .
but with reserved manners which prevented his being generally pleasing ;
her many beginnings were displayed .
do you sit where you like ?
but i must be more in want of a friend , or an agreeable companion , than i have yet been , to take the trouble of conquering any body’s reserve to procure one .
they all walked about together , to see that every thing was as it should be ;
i am quite enough in love .
mr elton looked all happiness at this proposition ;
it is not that i am without the wish ;
it was not very long , though rather longer than mr weston had foreseen , before she had the power of forming some opinion of frank churchill’s feelings .
never seen him in her life before , and call him knightley !
she thought well of frank in almost every respect ;
i am very little able have you a chair , ma’am ?
she was obliged to go the next morning for an hour or two to mrs goddard’s , but it was then to be settled that she should return to hartfield , to make a regular visit of some days .
such events are very interesting , but the suspense of them cannot last long .
if this is living in the country , it is nothing very formidable .
it was foolish , it was wrong , to take so active a part in bringing any two people together .
“ no , no ;
more is avowedly due to her .
but there was no doing any thing , with mr elton fidgeting behind her and watching every touch .
“ has your son been with you , then ?
remiss , perhaps , more in thought than fact ;
such a woman as jane fairfax probably never fell in mrs elton’s way before and no degree of vanity can prevent her acknowledging her own comparative littleness in action , if not in consciousness .
i am sure there is nobody’s praise that could give us so much pleasure as miss woodhouse’s .
not by manoeuvring and finessing , but by vigour and resolution .
and that as mrs elton had very readily acceded to it , so it was to be , if she had no objection .
“ to be sure we do , ” cried his father ;
i assure you the utmost stretch of public fame would not make me amends for the loss of any happiness in private life .
and that it is much more advisable to mix in the world in a proper degree , without living in it either too much or too little .
“ take it , ” said emma , smiling , and pushing the paper towards harriet “ it is for you .
and i have no doubt that he will thrive , and be a very rich man in time and his being illiterate and coarse need not disturb us .
miniatures , half-lengths , whole-lengths , pencil , crayon , and water-colours had been all tried in turn .
“ but you should tell them of the letter , my dear , ” said her father .
“ i had .
when harriet had closed her evidence , she appealed to her dear miss woodhouse , to say whether she had not good ground for hope .
“ it would be very hard , indeed , my dear , if poor isabella were to be anywhere but at hartfield .
“ i know you saw my letter , and think you may remember my wish in your favour .
a man must be very much in love , indeed , to describe her so .
his first proposition and request , that the dance begun at mr cole’s should be finished there that the same party should be collected , and the same musician engaged , met with the readiest acquiescence .
i am sure they were talking of me ;
you quite shock me ;
it had been a very happy fortnight , and forlorn must be the sinking from it into the common course of hartfield days .
it would not be a bad thing for her to be very much in love with a proper object .
and there was time enough for emma to form a reasonable judgment , as their visit included all the rest of the morning .
how shocked had he been by her behaviour to miss bates !
what a disappointment it would be !
and that he might be expected at hartfield very soon .
in her mother she lost the only person able to cope with her .
it was very lucky , for i would not have had poor james think himself slighted upon any account ;
to see that harriet’s hopes had been entirely groundless , a mistake , a delusion , as complete a delusion as any of her own that harriet was nothing ;
but if , which i rather imagine , your making the match , as you call it , means only your planning it , your saying to yourself one idle day , i think it would be a very good thing for miss taylor if mr weston were to marry her ,’ and saying it again to yourself every now and then afterwards , why do you talk of success ?
emma felt that she could not do better than go home directly .
human nature is so well disposed towards those who are in interesting situations , that a young person , who either marries or dies , is sure of being kindly spoken of .
she heard the words “ my son , ” and “ frank , ” and “ my son , ” repeated several times over ;
the terror which the woman and boy had been creating in harriet was then their own portion .
emma thought with pleasure of some change of subject .
she had soon fixed on the size and sort of portrait .
her tears fell abundantly but her grief was so truly artless , that no dignity could have made it more respectable in emma’s eyes and she listened to her and tried to console her with all her heart and understanding really for the time convinced that harriet was the superior creature of the two and that to resemble her would be more for her own welfare and happiness than all that genius or intelligence could do .
she is a woman that one may , that one must laugh at ;
“ not at all , ” cried he ;
and therefore , without saying any thing of our carriage , we should be able to explore the different beauties extremely well .
at three-and-twenty to have drawn such a prize !
i feel a strong persuasion , this morning , that i shall soon be abroad .
but before she could quiet mr elton , the subject was so completely past that any reviving question from her would have been awkward .
we hear of him for ever at some watering-place or other .
“ i am afraid , ” said he , composing his features , “ i am very much afraid , my dear emma , that you will not smile when you hear it .
how well she looked last night !
message to miss smith !
and therefore she let it pass .
it did assist ;
another view of man , my second brings , behold him there , the monarch of the seas !
she gave a slight glance round the table , and applied herself to it .
every body must have seen the snow coming on .
but it is even so .
miss bates , let emma help you to a little bit of tart a very little bit .
but i do not like the corner into vicarage lane .
there was a tooth amiss .
but she would have nothing to do with it at present .
mr elton and his bride .
it was our darling wish that you might be attached to each other and we were persuaded that it was so .
we quarrelled .
and the woodhouses had long held a high place in the consideration of the neighbourhood which mr elton had first entered not two years ago , to make his way as he could , without any alliances but in trade , or any thing to recommend him to notice but his situation and his civility .
why so ?
he did , on the condition of some promises on her side :
to encounter any thing , rather than the remembrance of neglect in such a cause .
and , as i said , i did then forswear ever drawing any body again .
and though , with diligence and good luck , he may be rich in time , it is next to impossible that he should have realised any thing yet .
he would go on , and say it all .
and now that i am satisfied on one point , the one material point , i am sincerely anxious for its all turning out well , and ready to hope that it may .
there is jealousy .
he understood what would be welcome ;
the manner of their coming ?
“ knightley !
suppose i go and invite miss bates to join us ?
he will find an addition to the society of highbury when he comes again ;
they took a few turns together along the walk .
he declined it from the first ;
he was very much vexed .
they had all the assistance which isabella could give , by letters of the strongest approbation ;
now , upon his father’s marriage , it was very generally proposed , as a most proper attention , that the visit should take place .
the ground covered with snow , and the atmosphere in that unsettled state between frost and thaw , which is of all others the most unfriendly for exercise , every morning beginning in rain or snow , and every evening setting in to freeze , she was for many days a most honourable prisoner .
he must do it all himself .
and had not the smallest doubt (nor have i now) that there would be a general cry-out upon her extreme good luck .
i assure you i began to think my caro sposo would be absolutely jealous .
what has he been judging by ?
these the finest beds and finest sorts .
the most satisfactory comparisons were rising in her mind .
how angry and how diverted he would be !
he was reckoned very handsome ;
“ such things do occur , undoubtedly .
“ this would soon have led to something better , of course , ” was her consoling reflection ;
frank’s was the first idea ;
i could never hope to equal my own doings at randalls .
she felt all the honest pride and complacency which her alliance with the present and future proprietor could fairly warrant , as she viewed the respectable size and style of the building , its suitable , becoming , characteristic situation , low and sheltered its ample gardens stretching down to meadows washed by a stream , of which the abbey , with all the old neglect of prospect , had scarcely a sight and its abundance of timber in rows and avenues , which neither fashion nor extravagance had rooted up .
.
.
her curiosity was greatly excited .
the baked apples and biscuits , excellent in their way , you know ;
in her letters i shall be at dear highbury again .
so it proved ;
emma spoke for her .
the wants and sufferings of the poor family , however , were the first subject on meeting .
and on the very morning of his setting off for bath again , emma , to dissipate some of the distress it occasioned , judged it best for her to return elizabeth martin’s visit .
more and more frightened , she immediately promised them money , and taking out her purse , gave them a shilling , and begged them not to want more , or to use her ill .
though always objecting to every marriage that was arranged , he never suffered beforehand from the apprehension of any ;
“ that you do not give another half-second to the subject .
i think , miss woodhouse , you and i must establish a musical club , and have regular weekly meetings at your house , or ours .
i shall think you a great blockhead , frank , if you bring the aunt without the niece .
as soon as she found i was really gone from randalls , she closed with the offer of that officious mrs elton ;
it was the answer to the communication of his intended marriage .
and it was signed f .
“ oh !
he was a great deal too full of the market to think of any thing else which is just as it should be , for a thriving man .
if she had so misinterpreted his feelings , she had little right to wonder that he , with self-interest to blind him , should have mistaken hers .
she was obliged to stop and think .
the muffin last night if it had been handed round once , i think it would have been enough .
“ you who are such a judge , and write so beautifully yourself .
i wanted them to put off the wedding .
she would speak of something totally different the children in brunswick square ;
“ might he not ?
how very odd !
she does not depend upon his coming so much as i do :
woman wore too amiable a form in it ;
she will probably have soon done , and then we shall go home .
he told me it was to be a great secret ;
this point was just arranged , when a visitor arrived to tear emma’s thoughts a little from the one subject which had engrossed them , sleeping or waking , the last twenty-four hours mrs weston , who had been calling on her daughter-in-law elect , and took hartfield in her way home , almost as much in duty to emma as in pleasure to herself , to relate all the particulars of so interesting an interview .
she recovered her voice .
and on box hill , perhaps , it had been the agony of a mind that would bear no more .
“ ah !
she might give just praise to harriet , or , by representing to him his own independence , relieve him from that state of indecision , which must be more intolerable than any alternative to such a mind as his .
i am sure of your kind support and aid .
oh !
“ i have nothing to say that can entertain miss woodhouse , or any other young lady .
“ indeed , i am very sorry to be right in this instance .
it is his companion all this evening , his solace , his delight .
” cried mr knightley .
i will say that for you .
oh !
frank churchill returned to his station by emma ;
this is what we all feel .
and she had the pleasure of seeing him most intently at work with his recollections ;
he will help me out of all my difficulties .’ and to this day , i do believe , she knows not whether it was his present or his daughter’s .
but it was a great deal too large , and he cut it smaller , and kept playing some time with what was left , before he gave it back to me .
no , upon my honour , there is no unsteadiness of character .
i am sure you always thought me unfit for the office i held .
jane says that colonel campbell is a little deaf .
oh !
it will be a small party , but where small parties are select , they are perhaps the most agreeable of any .
it seemed too precious an offering for any degree of publicity .
it was not worth thinking of ;
one set might recommend their all removing to donwell , and leaving hartfield for the john knightleys ;
oh !
but she was always right .
the evening was quiet and conversable , as mr woodhouse declined cards entirely for the sake of comfortable talk with his dear isabella , and the little party made two natural divisions ;
it would be a charming introduction for you , who have lived so secluded a life ;
the fever was over , and emma could harbour little fear of the pulse being quickened again by injurious courtesy .
every thing as natural and simple as possible .
the word home made his father look on him with fresh complacency .
“ and if the dixons should absolutely deny all knowledge of it we must conclude it to come from the campbells .
but he can have no english delicacy towards the feelings of other people :
a pleasant “ thank you ” seemed meant to laugh it off , but a blush , a quivering lip , a tear in the eye , shewed that it was felt beyond a laugh .
every thing declared it ;
she might talk on ;
mr knightley , a sensible man about seven or eight-and-thirty , was not only a very old and intimate friend of the family , but particularly connected with it , as the elder brother of isabella’s husband .
“ you are right .
the older a person grows , harriet , the more important it is that their manners should not be bad ;
“ oh !
for though the vicarage of highbury was not large , he was known to have some independent property ;
i shall leave you together .
mrs weston indeed is much beyond praise , and he is exactly what one values , so hospitable , and so fond of society ;
“ oh !
she had provided a plentiful dinner for them ;
but without receiving any benefit ;
it was as much as emma could bear , without being impolite .
but i thought he would have staid now , and it would have been a pity not to have mentioned .
mr elton had retreated into the card-room , looking (emma trusted) very foolish .
her aunt is a good creature , but , as a constant companion , must be very tiresome .
“ leave out the two last lines , and there is no reason why you should not write it into your book .
“ and who do you think came in while we were there ?
i did not know what to do .
and how they got their fortune nobody knows .
(looking round with the most good-humoured dependence on every body’s assent) do not you all think i shall ?
now , my dear madam , i will release you ;
i believe you did not hear me telling the others in the drawing-room that we are expecting frank .
but as without supposing it possible that she could be ignorant of any of the particulars of mr frank churchill’s going , she proceeded to give them all , it was of no consequence .
presently mr knightley looked back , and came and sat down by her .
but there is no reason to suppose the instrument is indifferent .
i see no sign of attachment i believe nothing of the pianoforte and proof only shall convince me that mr knightley has any thought of marrying jane fairfax .
she heard him sigh .
“ imprudent , if you please but not mad .
“ he has not been here yet , ” replied emma .
the weather was most favourable for her ;
i would not have you too sanguine ;
and she imagined he was come to see how it might turn up .
i dare say there was a difference when i was staying with them the other day .
he wishes his boys to be active and hardy ;
the child of good fortune !
emma laughed , and replied :
and that serle and the butler should see that every thing were safe in the house , as usual .
he could not believe her to be encouraging him .
some people are surprized , i believe , that the eldest was not , but isabella would have him called henry , which i thought very pretty of her .
in another moment a happier sight caught her ;
i do not mean to set you against him , but indeed he is not quite the thing !
“ yes no yes , to mrs goddard’s .
“ my poor dear isabella , ” said he , fondly taking her hand , and interrupting , for a few moments , her busy labours for some one of her five children “ how long it is , how terribly long since you were here !
and even , when he might have determined not to look , she was confident that he was often listening .
miss churchill , however , being of age , and with the full command of her fortune though her fortune bore no proportion to the family-estate was not to be dissuaded from the marriage , and it took place , to the infinite mortification of mr and mrs churchill , who threw her off with due decorum .
retired enough for safety , and occupied enough for cheerfulness .
oh !
he professed himself extremely anxious about her fair friend her fair , lovely , amiable friend .
there was no occasion to press the matter farther .
he joined them immediately , and , with scarcely an invitation , seated himself between them .
something new for your coachman and horses to be making their way through a storm of snow .
but mr elton had only drunk wine enough to elevate his spirits , not at all to confuse his intellects .
what a horrible idea !
“ but then , to be an old maid at last , like miss bates !
which i thought almost too kind !
an idea which she greatly feared had been made a subject of material distress to the delicacy of jane’s feelings , by the levity or carelessness of frank churchill’s .
what arises from discretion must be honoured .
” and for a little while she hoped he would not talk of it , and that a silent rumination might suffice to restore him to the relish of his own smooth gruel .
we always say what we like to one another .
she had great pleasure in hearing frank churchill talked of ;
i met the letters in my way this morning , and seeing my son’s hand , presumed to open it though it was not directed to me it was to mrs weston .
lives only four miles from maple grove .
i wish i may not sink into poor emma’ with him at once .
“ as you do us such ample justice now , ” said emma , laughing , “ i will venture to ask , whether you did not come a little doubtfully at first ?
a very friendly shake of the hand , a very earnest “ good-bye , ” closed the speech , and the door had soon shut out frank churchill .
you need not be prompted to write with the appearance of sorrow for his disappointment .
and very pleasant people they seem to be .
and (raising his voice still more) i do not see why miss fairfax should not be mentioned too .
she had resolved to defer the disclosure till mrs weston were safe and well .
i dare say he will come in when he knows who is here .
she had been thinking of him the moment before , as unquestionably sixteen miles distant .
and mrs weston must not speak of it again .
the advantage of the match i felt to be all on her side ;
they had received her doubtingly , if not coolly ;
” said emma , laughing .
as for jane fairfax , she might at least relieve her feelings from any present solicitude on her account .
a most dangerous precedent indeed !
he had business at the crown about his hay , and a great many errands for mrs weston at ford’s , but he need not hurry any body else .
so kind as to call to hear the new pianoforte .
could it really be meant for me ?
for two or three months longer i shall remain where i am , and as i am .
for i thought it would be making her comfortable at once .
the ladies had not been long in the drawing-room , before the other ladies , in their different divisions , arrived .
“ certainly .
but yet , i think had you not been in the case i should still have distrusted him .
i believe i did not play with the children quite so much as usual .
but if you have any wish to speak openly to me as a friend , or to ask my opinion of any thing that you may have in contemplation as a friend , indeed , you may command me .
you , who have been hearing and seeing so much of late on these subjects , who must have been so deep in the business on miss campbell’s account we shall not excuse your being indifferent about mr elton and miss hawkins .
it was not possible that the occurrence should not be strongly recommending each to the other .
there was no recovering miss taylor nor much likelihood of ceasing to pity her ;
, and her caro sposo , and her resources , and all her airs of pert pretension and underbred finery .
a look ;
and how could it possibly come into your head ?
but , alas !
tell me if you think i shall succeed .
it was not with mrs suckling , it was not with mrs bragge , but in felicity and splendour it fell short only of them :
he recommended it for all the children , but particularly for the weakness in little bella’s throat , both sea air and bathing .
i wish our opinions were the same .
and , on entering the carriage , sunk back for a moment overcome then reproaching herself for having taken no leave , making no acknowledgment , parting in apparent sullenness , she looked out with voice and hand eager to shew a difference ;
this wretched note was the finale of emma’s breakfast .
“ i am sorry to find , my love , that my father does not think you looking well but i hope it is only from being a little fatigued .
mrs weston was disappointed .
miss bates would hardly give emma time to say how perfectly new this circumstance was to her ;
he shook his head ;
“ no , upon no account in the world , mr weston ;
“ agreed , agreed .
upon the whole , emma left her with such softened , charitable feelings , as made her look around in walking home , and lament that highbury afforded no young man worthy of giving her independence ;
you and miss smith , and miss fairfax , will be three , and the two miss coxes five ;
i do not know what would become of my crayons and my instrument , if i had half so many applicants .’ bad enough as it is , for i absolutely neglect them both to an unpardonable degree .
“ he trifles here , ” said he , “ as to the temptation .
and it was but yesterday i was telling mr cole , i really was ashamed to look at our new grand pianoforte in the drawing-room , while i do not know one note from another , and our little girls , who are but just beginning , perhaps may never make any thing of it ;
emma hoped it must rapidly work harriet’s cure ;
“ not quite .
he was a very good looking young man ;
he was warm in his reprobation of mr elton’s conduct ;
“ no , i fancy not , ” replied mrs elton , with a most satisfied smile .
your reasonings carry my judgment along with them entirely .
it need not detain us long .
“ ever hear her !
she knew the limitations of her own powers too well to attempt more than she could perform with credit ;
to any thing , every thing to time , chance , circumstance , slow effects , sudden bursts , perseverance and weariness , health and sickness .
how d’ye do ?
i always take the part of my own sex .
she wished he could love a ballroom better , and could like frank churchill better .
if mr elton , on his return , made his own indifference as evident and indubitable as she could not doubt he would anxiously do , she could not imagine harriet’s persisting to place her happiness in the sight or the recollection of him .
he was no longer teased by being wished joy of so sorrowful an event ;
she will be disagreeable in infancy , and correct herself as she grows older .
absolute neglect of the mother and sisters , when invited to come , would be ingratitude .
and i had a glimpse of a fine large tree , with a bench round it , which put me so exactly in mind !
what has mr frank churchill done , to make you suppose him such an unnatural creature ?
undoubtedly if you wish it , i will endeavour to persuade them both .
i hope whenever poor isabella’s little ones have the measles , she will send for perry .
“ i always told you she was a little ;
“ i am sorry there should be any thing like doubt in the case , ” replied emma ;
satisfied that it was so , and feeling it her due , she had enjoyed it without reflection ;
they would not fatigue miss fairfax on any account , and would only ask for one more .
i absolutely must go in by myself , though i hate being stuck up in the barouche-landau without a companion ;
i will attack them with more address .
“ very .
look !
“ it is a great pity that their circumstances should be so confined !
“ much , indeed !
miss fairfax must already have given her account .
do not run away with such an idea .
and every thing in this world , excepting that trunk and the direction , was consequently a blank .
” replied mrs weston , smiling , “ what is the certainty of caprice ?
she wanted , rather , to be quiet , and out of temptation ;
and , on receiving no answer , added , “ she ought not to be angry with you , i suspect , whatever he may be .
never were such neighbours .
i ought not to have attempted more .
she had heard , as soon as she got back to mrs goddard’s , that mr martin had been there an hour before , and finding she was not at home , nor particularly expected , had left a little parcel for her from one of his sisters , and gone away ;
what do you mean ?
he and mrs weston were both dreadfully desponding .
i have it not but i know how to prize and respect it .
there , indeed , lay real pleasure , for there she was giving up the sweetest hours of the twenty-four to his comfort ;
i should be the oddest creature in the world if i were not for a few weeks at least .
a man at his age what is he ?
the campbells were gone to ireland for three months ;
but richmond was the very distance for easy intercourse .
i am sure you must be ,’ said he , and i will send you another supply ;
i know what thorough justice you will do it , and have scarcely a doubt of its happy effect .
very well ;
now , it so happened that in spite of emma’s resolution of never marrying , there was something in the name , in the idea of mr frank churchill , which always interested her .
and from the first .
” which instantly burst forth , had all the evidence of corresponding perturbation .
dear , yes , ” before the gentleman joined them .
“ but you are always kind .
but miss bates soon came “ very happy and obliged ” but emma’s conscience told her that there was not the same cheerful volubility as before less ease of look and manner .
not a creature knowing it but themselves neither the campbells , nor her family , nor his .
her nerves were under continual irritation and suffering ;
in the way of love , i am sure he does not .
mr knightley was standing just here , was not he ?
colonel campbell , you know , is quite our angel .
i could not bear to have henry supplanted .
only think of his gallantry in coming away before the other men !
“ you did behave very shamefully .
“ very serious !
i always told you he would be here again soon , did not i ?
i am always well , you know .
the only way of proving it , however , will be to turn to our maps .
“ your feelings are singular .
in half a minute they were in the room .
and emma , having sent the child on , was beginning to think how she might draw back a little more , when they both looked around , and she was obliged to join them .
such , for half an hour , was the conversation interrupted only once by mrs weston , who came out , in her solicitude after her son-in-law , to inquire if he were come and she was a little uneasy .
“ i am ready , ” said emma , “ whenever i am wanted .
“ yes .
i am sure it was a source of high entertainment to you , to feel that you were taking us all in .
and i do not know , mrs elton , whether the uncertainty of our meetings , the sort of constant expectation there will be of his coming in to-day or to-morrow , and at any hour , may not be more friendly to happiness than having him actually in the house .
he said no more .
it had not been forgotten before , but it had been soon acknowledged vain to attempt to fix a day .
he certainly might have heard mr elton speak with more unreserve than she had ever done , and mr elton might not be of an imprudent , inconsiderate disposition as to money matters ;
two days of joyful security were immediately followed by the over-throw of every thing .
five couple are nothing , when one thinks seriously about it .
“ no , it by no means wanted strength it was not a large hand , but very clear and certainly strong .
and to convince you that i have been speaking truth , i am now going to destroy what i ought to have destroyed long ago what i ought never to have kept i know that very well (blushing as she spoke) .
“ harriet , i will not affect to be in doubt of your meaning .
and it would not have signified whether he did or no .
“ what an amiable creature i was !
she was wanting to see him again , and especially to see him in company with mrs weston , upon his behaviour to whom her opinion of him was to depend .
and miss bates was obliged to give a direct answer before he would hear her in any thing else .
“ no , no , that’s to-morrow ;
every letter has been full of it ;
but , from all my observations , i am convinced of her being an artless , amiable girl , with very good notions , very seriously good principles , and placing her happiness in the affections and utility of domestic life .
and indeed they particularly wish her to try her native air , as she has not been quite so well as usual lately .
not being aware , probably , any more than myself , of the very great inequality which you are so sensible of .
no , he felt that it ought not to be attempted .
“ ah !
we are to walk about your gardens , and gather the strawberries ourselves , and sit under trees ;
they were entering the hall .
her allowance is very liberal ;
his good sense and good principles would delight you .
“ but , with common sense , ” she added , “ i am afraid i have had little to do .
but what can be the matter ?
he had all the clearness and quickness of mind which she wanted , and he could sometimes act an ungracious , or say a severe thing .
from them he would have proceeded to miss fairfax , but she was so deep in conversation with john knightley , that it would have been too positive an interruption ;
he had at first hoped to induce mr woodhouse to remove with her to donwell ;
and i begged mrs weston to come with me , that i might be sure of succeeding .
he had been too much expected by the best judges , for surprize but there was great joy .
emma assisted with her invention , memory and taste ;
you and i will have a nice basin of gruel together .
i thought i knew him .
such a delightful evening as it would have been !
before she had committed herself by any public profession of eternal friendship for jane fairfax , or done more towards a recantation of past prejudices and errors , than saying to mr knightley , “ she certainly is handsome ;
“ but where could you hear it ?
and here i have been so long , that anywhere else i should think it necessary to apologise ;
no wonder that you have such a curiosity to see him .
“ my dear isabella , ” exclaimed he hastily “ pray do not concern yourself about my looks .
with him it was most unnatural .
the intention , however , was indubitable ;
latterly she had been more and more aware of it .
“ oh !
” and having gone through what immediately followed of the basis of their disagreement , and his persisting to act in direct opposition to jane fairfax’s sense of right , he made a fuller pause to say , “ this is very bad .
i beg your pardon .
she had an unhappy state of health in general for the child of such a man , for she hardly knew what indisposition was ;
i would not have mr knightley know any thing about it for the world !
i was not aware of it myself .
charming people , mr and mrs weston ;
mr knightley shook his head at her .
but just enough to feel that the first meeting was over , and to give her the impression of his not being improved by the mixture of pique and pretension , now spread over his air .
she was displeased ;
we both abhor suspense .
i must speak to my uncle .
at christmas every body invites their friends about them , and people think little of even the worst weather .
and yet it was not so good but that many of them wanted a better .
and as to myself , i have been long perfectly convinced , though perhaps i never told you so before , that the sea is very rarely of use to any body .
the consciousness of having done amiss , had exposed her to a thousand inquietudes , and made her captious and irritable to a degree that must have been that had been hard for him to bear .
if i could be sure of the rooms being thoroughly aired but is mrs stokes to be trusted ?
“ aye , very true .
no , there is but one .
but they live very comfortably .
“ my report from mrs goddard’s , ” said she presently , “ was not so pleasant as i had hoped not better’ was my answer .
“ ah !
and though not meaning to be induced by him , or by any body else , to give up a situation which she believed more replete with good than any she could change it for , she had a great curiosity to see him , a decided intention of finding him pleasant , of being liked by him to a certain degree , and a sort of pleasure in the idea of their being coupled in their friends’ imaginations .
only consider how great it would have been .
she was more and more convinced that mrs weston was quite mistaken in that surmise .
she must tell you herself what she is yet not by word , for never was there a human creature who would so designedly suppress her own merit .
harriet’s claims to marry well are not so contemptible as you represent them .
“ i should hope not ;
you will excuse her not coming to you she is not able she is gone into her own room i want her to lie down upon the bed .
did you ever see any thing ?
“ you are so noble in your ideas !
in the few minutes’ conversation which she had yet had with him , while harriet had been partially insensible , he had spoken of her terror , her naïveté , her fervour as she seized and clung to his arm , with a sensibility amused and delighted ;
” cried emma , putting her hand before her face , and jumping up , “ you make me more ashamed of myself than i can bear .
i left her dancing with mr george otway ;
well , i had always rather fancied it would be some young lady hereabouts ;
i do not scruple to say that she plays extremely well .
“ to a mrs smallridge charming woman most superior to have the charge of her three little girls delightful children .
“ that’s quite unnecessary ;
oh !
but i do flatter myself , my dear jane , that my influence is not entirely worn out .
she knew that at times she must be missed ;
“ i dare say you would ;
upon these occasions , a lady’s character generally precedes her ;
and the last half-hour of an evening which mr woodhouse was persuaded to spend with his daughter at randalls , was passed by the two young people in schemes on the subject .
“ for shame , emma !
the late event had softened away his pride , and he was , earlier than i could have anticipated , wholly reconciled and complying ;
i hope time has not made you less willing to pardon .
but it is his way .
“ oh !
“ three-and-twenty !
there was a restlessness , which shewed a mind not at ease .
i do not care for myself .
and , with a repetition of every thing that she could venture to say of the good wishes which she really felt , took leave .
he was so busy the last time he was at kingston that he quite forgot it , but he goes again to-morrow .
your musical knowledge alone would entitle you to name your own terms , have as many rooms as you like , and mix in the family as much as you chose ;
well (sitting down again) go on what else ?
of course it must be from colonel campbell .
and very likely to happen with the donwell servants , who are all , i have often observed , extremely awkward and remiss .
that was the act of a very , very young man , one too young to consider whether the inconvenience of it might not very much exceed the pleasure .
but that he should talk of encouragement , should consider her as aware of his views , accepting his attentions , meaning (in short) , to marry him !
she read , and was surprized .
“ you are silent , miss fairfax but i hope you mean to take an interest in this news .
it was but a very few days before i had my sore throat just before mr and mrs john knightley came i think the very evening .
and altogether it was more than i could bear ;
any nonsense will serve .
she is his principal correspondent , i assure you .
“ but am disposed to side with you , mr weston .
poor dear jane was talking of it just now .
“ oh yes ;
and harriet , unchecked , ran eagerly through what she had to tell .
john and isabella , and every other friend , were agreed in approving it .
” said miss bates , joyfully ;
“ the post-office is a wonderful establishment !
he was more in love with her than emma had supposed ;
were this most unequal of all connexions to take place , on her must rest all the reproach of having given it a beginning ;
i am sure i have not got one half so good .
but i know they will , because it is a family that a certain lady , of some consequence , at enscombe , has a particular dislike to :
i have been silent from surprize merely , excessive surprize .
and , seriously , miss fairfax is naturally so pale , as almost always to give the appearance of ill health .
every body in and about highbury who had ever visited mr elton , was disposed to pay him attention on his marriage .
and no need to find excuses for mr elton’s absenting himself .
but did you never see him ?
there was a great deal of friendly and of compassionate attachment on his side but no love .
quite the queen of the evening !
i am sure , rather than run the risk of hurting mr and mrs cole , you would stay a little longer than you might wish .
she will be missed every moment .
but it seemed as if an angel only could have been quite without resentment under such a stroke .
“ there it is .
harriet had not been at home ;
it would have grieved me to lose your acquaintance , which must have been the consequence of your marrying mr martin .
they never could have been all three together , without her having stabbed jane fairfax’s peace in a thousand instances ;
if it were love , it might be simple , single , successless love on her side alone .
when she became sensible of this , it struck her that she could not be very much in love ;
when i look back to the first time i saw him !
jane and i are both so shocked about the apples !
but what is the meaning of this ?
though all have not our situations .
and his servants forgot it .
it was through a series of strange blunders !
and if weston had asked me to recommend him a wife , i should certainly have named miss taylor .
but not quite well .
harriet was remembered only from being her friend .
emma began to listen better .
they had been meeting almost every day since his arrival .
emma’s confusion , and the acknowledged intimacy , seemed to declare her affection engaged .
“ by all means , if you can .
“ you will not find either , between donwell and highbury .
this has been a most agreeable piece of news indeed .
it was well to have a comfort in store on harriet’s behalf , though it might be wise to let the fancy touch it seldom ;
“ don’t class us together , harriet .
very wrong , very wrong indeed .
emma seriously hoped she would .
“ i am delighted to hear you speak so stoutly on the subject , ” replied emma , smiling ;
to be sure , ” cried emma , “ it is always incomprehensible to a man that a woman should ever refuse an offer of marriage .
all that i have to recommend being comprised in , do not spoil them , and do not physic them .
the answer was only in this short note :
however , he is coming , i assure you :
” these were her reasons she had no better .
the post-office catching cold fetching letters and friendship , were long under discussion ;
harriet felt this too much to utter more than a few words of eager exclamation .
they would be married , and settled either at or near enscombe .
i meant only myself .
i dare say he is really nothing extraordinary :
after the first chat of pleasure he was silent ;
“ the joke , ” he replied gravely , “ seemed confined to you and mr churchill .
an hour’s ride .
what two letters of the alphabet are there , that express perfection ?
she was , of course , the object of their joint dislike .
you are not afraid of being supposed ashamed .
might she not say , very dear ?
“ true , sir ;
the event was more favourable to mr woodhouse than to emma .
but when he was gone , she began to be a little tranquillised and subdued and in the course of the sleepless night , which was the tax for such an evening , she found one or two such very serious points to consider , as made her feel , that even her happiness must have some alloy .
“ i hope she does .
if jane repressed her for a little time , she soon began again ;
but a farmer can need none of my help , and is , therefore , in one sense , as much above my notice as in every other he is below it .
it was now the middle of june , and the weather fine ;
at first it was downright dulness to emma .
there is a great difference .
and the charade !
and setting aside the 10 ,000 l .
he must know that the woodhouses had been settled for several generations at hartfield , the younger branch of a very ancient family and that the eltons were nobody .
she has talked of it since .
but do come in .
the history which he had to give mrs cole of the rise and progress of the affair was so glorious the steps so quick , from the accidental rencontre , to the dinner at mr green’s , and the party at mrs brown’s smiles and blushes rising in importance with consciousness and agitation richly scattered the lady had been so easily impressed so sweetly disposed had in short , to use a most intelligible phrase , been so very ready to have him , that vanity and prudence were equally contented .
“ when frank left us , ” continued he , “ it was quite uncertain when we might see him again , which makes this day’s news doubly welcome .
and left a name behind her that would not soon die away .
she wished him very well ;
but his uncle and aunt will not spare him .
i think mr john knightley very far from looking well .
mr perry was an intelligent , gentlemanlike man , whose frequent visits were one of the comforts of mr woodhouse’s life ;
and that , face to face , mrs elton treats her with all the respect which she has a claim to .
beyond it she would on no account proceed .
it was the very event to engage those who talk most , the young and the low ;
why does not perry see her ?
i think you will agree with me , (turning with a soft air to emma ,) i think i shall certainly have your approbation , though mr knightley perhaps , from being used to the large parties of london , may not quite enter into our feelings .
“ where may i ask ?
any other situation would have been much less in character .
the dessert succeeded , the children came in , and were talked to and admired amid the usual rate of conversation ;
and i dare say she may have made out a very good list now .
have you thought , my dear , where you shall put her and what room there will be for the children ?
she was more equal to her situation than most girls would have been , and had sense , and energy , and spirits that might be hoped would bear her well and happily through its little difficulties and privations .
“ yes , certainly it does .
mrs elton’s resources were inadequate to such an attack .
and , indeed , with such a worshipping wife , it was hardly possible that any natural defects in it should not be increased .
better than nearer !
and i shall be happy to tell you , for we all behaved charmingly .
“ poor child !
and my friends say i am not entirely devoid of taste ;
“ particularly pleasant .
something happened before tea , but not that .
but mr woodhouse would never believe it .
tell me , then , have i no chance of ever succeeding ?
i think it is the state of mind which gives most spirit and delight .
now we are going to have just the right weather for him , fine , dry , settled weather .
especially with such a groundwork of anticipation as her mind had already made .
she is superior to mr robert martin .
but as to any thing else , upon my honour my performance is mediocre to the last degree .
your uncle and aunt will never allow you to leave england .
that i had never seen her !
and yet emma fancied there was a something of resentment , a something bordering on it in her style , which increased the desirableness of their being separate .
“ you will soon be cooler , if you sit still , ” said emma .
she closed with this offer , resolving to break with me entirely , and wrote the next day to tell me that we never were to meet again .
it was no more than the principals were prepared for ;
it will do you good to speak of your distress , whatever it may be .
and i must say that jane deserves it as much as any body can .
there is health , not merely in her bloom , but in her air , her head , her glance .
gone to mr woodhouse’s .
emma could not but picture it all , and feel how justly they might resent , how naturally harriet must suffer .
“ me !
certainly , i can have no doubt of his being fond of her .
why do you make a doubt of it ?
you shall have a charming wife .
here am i come down for only one day , and you are engaged with a dinner-party !
” emma restrained her indignation , and only turned from her in silence .
i have been walking over the country , and am now , i hope , rational enough to make the rest of my letter what it ought to be .
with such an opinion , in confirmation of his own , mr woodhouse hoped to influence every visitor of the newly married pair ;
i think it is so .
it is impossible to express our surprize .
the weather continued much the same all the following morning ;
and here are a new set of irish melodies .
“ no trouble in the world , ma’am , ” said the obliging mrs ford .
i shall introduce her , of course , very particularly to my brother and sister when they come to us .
she could not but suppose it to be a match that every body who knew them must think of .
but as to the greater misery of the victims , i do not know where it lies .
” and it was spoken with a sort of sighing animation , which had a vast deal of the lover .
or a shark ?
she is absolutely charming !
and to them succeeded one , which must be at least equally unpleasant to jane inquiries whether she had yet heard of any situation likely to suit her , and professions of mrs elton’s meditated activity .
“ was he handsome ?
“ i hope so for at that time i was a fool .
that she had been imposed on by others in a most mortifying degree ;
that was the service which made me begin to feel how superior he was to every other being upon earth .
i praised the fair lady too , and altogether sent him away very happy .
and , as far as i can answer for myself , shall be most happy it seems the only improvement that could be .
on these subjects , her perplexity and distress were very great and her mind had to pass again and again through every bitter reproach and sorrowful regret that had ever surrounded it .
late hours do not agree with us .
“ i do not know whether it ought to be so , but certainly silly things do cease to be silly if they are done by sensible people in an impudent way .
” mr elton was appealed to .
“ do not you remember one morning ?
“ i cannot imagine , ” said mrs elton , (feeling the indignity as a wife ought to do ,) “ i cannot imagine how he could do such a thing by you , of all people in the world !
“ very true , ” said harriet .
“ dear miss woodhouse !
it was not thrown away on her , she bounded higher than ever , flew farther down the middle , and was in a continual course of smiles .
“ to be sure , ” said harriet , in a mortified voice , “ he is not so genteel as real gentlemen .
do not imagine me in danger of forgetting it .
but how sad it is that he should not live at home with his father !
” part only of this answer , however , was admitted .
emma had not another word to oppose .
she listened with much inward suffering , but with great outward patience , to harriet’s detail .
what a view this gives of her sense of his behaviour !
and i could immediately secure you some of the best society in the place .
she has now been a longer time stationary there , than she ever was before , and she begins to want change .
you and i must positively exert our authority .
and after walking together so long , and thinking so much alike , emma felt herself so well acquainted with him , that she could hardly believe it to be only their second meeting .
there is my father another of my father but the idea of sitting for his picture made him so nervous , that i could only take him by stealth ;
she was standing in the entrance .
.
and jane caught no cold last night .
we must begin ;
mrs weston , kind-hearted and musical , was particularly interested by the circumstance , and emma could not help being amused at her perseverance in dwelling on the subject ;
one morning , about ten days after mrs churchill’s decease , emma was called downstairs to mr weston , who “ could not stay five minutes , and wanted particularly to speak with her .
jane , jane , you will be a miserable creature .
they all united ;
he could not be persuaded that so many good-looking houses as he saw around him , could not furnish numbers enough for such a meeting ;
but she is charmingly recovered .
but whether he were entirely free from peculiar attachment whether there were no actual preference remained a little longer doubtful .
judge between us .
i need not so totally despair of an equal alliance , as to be addressing myself to miss smith !
emma was extremely gratified .
“ that sweet , amiable jane fairfax !
and i will add this praise , that i do not think her personally vain .
nobody could nurse her , as we should do .
i do not pretend to emma’s genius for foretelling and guessing .
i am sure if jane is tired , you will be so kind as to give her your arm .
he promised to join me here , and pay his respects to you .
miss nash has put down all the texts he has ever preached from since he came to highbury .
i condition for nothing else ;
she wished to see what every body found so well worth seeing , and she and mr weston had agreed to chuse some fine morning and drive thither .
“ but she is a pretty little creature , and i am inclined to think very well of her disposition .
elegance , which , whether of person or of mind , she saw so little in highbury .
he loves any thing of the sort , and especially any thing that pays woman a compliment .
but really i begin now to comprehend that a married woman has many things to call her attention .
she ought to go and she was longing to see her ;
after receiving a very indifferent education she is left in mrs goddard’s hands to shift as she can ;
but i would not wish you to take the trouble of making any inquiries at present .
“ when i got to donwell , ” said he , “ knightley could not be found .
the decree is issued by somebody .
i do not care whether i meet him or not except that of the two i had rather not see him and indeed i would go any distance round to avoid him but i do not envy his wife in the least ;
time did not compose her .
his professional engagements did not allow of his being put off , but both father and daughter were disturbed by its happening so .
and mr weston , unasked , promised to get frank over to join them , if possible ;
and a .
he shook her heartily and gratefully by the hand , and entered on the subject in a manner to prove , that he now only wanted time and persuasion to think the engagement no very bad thing .
and every body admitted it to be no more than due decorum .
the pleasantness of the morning had induced him to walk forward , and leave his horses to meet him by another road , a mile or two beyond highbury and happening to have borrowed a pair of scissors the night before of miss bates , and to have forgotten to restore them , he had been obliged to stop at her door , and go in for a few minutes :
“ it was short merely to announce but cheerful , exulting , of course .
these kind of things are very well at christmas , when one is sitting round the fire ;
and there are several .
i have blamed you , and lectured you , and you have borne it as no other woman in england would have borne it .
mrs bates , the widow of a former vicar of highbury , was a very old lady , almost past every thing but tea and quadrille .
could she have chosen with whom to associate , she would not have chosen her .
you seem shut out from every thing in the most complete retirement .
mr woodhouse was quite at ease ;
and when harriet appeared , and in very good spirits , and without having any such reason to give for her long absence , she felt a satisfaction which settled her with her own mind , and convinced her , that let mr knightley think or say what he would , she had done nothing which woman’s friendship and woman’s feelings would not justify .
let us wait , therefore , for this letter .
you may believe me .
she had talked her into love ;
charade .
her eyes were towards donwell as she walked , but she saw him not .
a miss hawkins !
it was , that he should be received at hartfield ;
well (checking herself , and trying to be more lively) , this is all to be forgotten .
to understand , thoroughly understand her own heart , was the first endeavour .
frank churchill , of whom , in the eagerness of her conversation with mrs weston , she had been seeing nothing , except that he had found a seat by miss fairfax , followed mr cole , to add his very pressing entreaties ;
that is ship ;
she made her plan ;
the wish of distinguishing her , as far as civility permitted , was very evident , though it could not often proceed beyond a look .
her fortnight was likely to be a month at least .
oh !
“ this will prove a spirited beginning of your winter engagements , sir .
amiable and delightful as miss woodhouse is , she never gave me the idea of a young woman likely to be attached ;
“ oh !
consider , she is sitting down which naturally presents a different which in short gives exactly the idea and the proportions must be preserved , you know .
there probably was something more to conceal than her own preference ;
i want his directions no more than his drugs .
every moment had brought a fresh surprize ;
i trust , at least , that you do not think mr knightley looking ill , ” turning her eyes with affectionate anxiety towards her husband .
emma had never seen her look so well , so lovely , so engaging .
and was eligibly and happily settled , while jane fairfax had yet her bread to earn .
and now you have emma’s account , i hope you will be satisfied .
perry was a week at cromer once , and he holds it to be the best of all the sea-bathing places .
his aunt could not bear to have him leave her .
and while she joined in the laugh , it was evident from jane’s countenance that she too was really hearing him , though trying to seem deaf .
many circumstances assisted the temptation .
and i hope she will be better off in one respect , and not be induced to go away after it has been her home so long .
her good-nature , too , is not so very slight a claim , comprehending , as it does , real , thorough sweetness of temper and manner , a very humble opinion of herself , and a great readiness to be pleased with other people .
questions must be answered , and surprizes be explained .
upon my word it is enough to put one in a fright .
“ i have not the least wish for it , i thank you .
“ mr knightley , ” said emma , trying to be lively , but really confused “ i am in a very extraordinary situation .
any want of attention to her here should be carefully avoided .
“ and i assure you , mr weston , i have very little doubt that my opinion will be decidedly in his favour .
but she took the compliment , and forgave the rest .
he was very warmly thanked both by mother and daughter ;
my dear emma , suppose we all have a little gruel .
mr woodhouse considered eight persons at dinner together as the utmost that his nerves could bear and here would be a ninth and emma apprehended that it would be a ninth very much out of humour at not being able to come even to hartfield for forty-eight hours without falling in with a dinner-party .
i can imagine your objection to harriet smith .
of very important , very recordable events , it was not more productive than such meetings usually are .
i want to puzzle you again .
within half an hour , he had passed from a thoroughly distressed state of mind , to something so like perfect happiness , that it could bear no other name .
he seems every thing the fondest parent could .
but now she made the sudden resolution of not passing their door without going in observing , as she proposed it to harriet , that , as well as she could calculate , they were just now quite safe from any letter from jane fairfax .
these several delays left him not another minute to lose ;
the misfortune of harriet’s cold had been pretty well gone through before her arrival .
he thought principally of mrs churchill’s illness , and wanted to know how she was treated ;
” continued mrs elton ;
who can think of miss smith , when miss woodhouse is near !
i wish my health allowed me to be a better neighbour .
for it shall be attended to .
it is a sort of prologue to the play , a motto to the chapter ;
make this intelligible to me .
i wanted the opinion of some one who could really judge .
and though you will never own being affected by weather , i think every body feels a north-east wind .
oh !
mr perry might have reason to regret the alteration , but nobody else could .
and could not think , without pain , of emma’s losing a single pleasure , or suffering an hour’s ennui , from the want of her companionableness :
long , very long , she felt she had been first ;
i might hope to be useful to their families in some way or other .
“ i never read one more to the purpose , certainly .
no ;
“ harriet may not consider every body tiresome that you would .
and how to guard the comfort of both to the utmost , was the question .
she was the instigator .
very full of his own claims , and little concerned about the feelings of others .
they were , in fact , only too great .
“ i have very little to say for my own conduct .
but she has always been kind to him (in her way allowing for little whims and caprices , and expecting every thing to be as she likes) .
but the martins occupied her thoughts a good deal ;
“ i must spend some time with them ;
what shall we do to rouse them ?
and i should have no scruples of staying as late as mrs weston , but on your account .
what an escape !
oh !
i am particularly glad to see and shake hands with you and to give you joy in person .
then , said i , i must run across , i am sure miss woodhouse will allow me just to run across and entreat her to come in ;
you look as if you would not do such a thing again .
” thought emma , “ he would have done as much for harriet .
she was sure of mrs weston’s wishing it to be communicated ;
but he must know that in fortune and consequence she was greatly his superior .
it was hardly right ;
“ we think so very differently on this point , mr knightley , that there can be no use in canvassing it .
“ no , papa , nobody thought of your walking .
and at last would begin admiring her drawings with so much zeal and so little knowledge as seemed terribly like a would-be lover , and made it some effort with her to preserve her good manners .
and she sat down , waiting in great terror till harriet should answer .
take your own .
“ very .
and emma felt the tears running down her cheeks almost all the way home , without being at any trouble to check them , extraordinary as they were .
and , unless he fancied himself at any time unequal to company , there was scarcely an evening in the week in which emma could not make up a card-table for him .
we shall soon overtake her .
miss bates’s powerful , argumentative mind might have strengthened yours .
i really cannot venture to name her salary to you , miss woodhouse .
i do not know .
about a fortnight after the alarm , they came to a sufficient explanation , and quite undesignedly .
for as to any of that heroism of sentiment which might have prompted her to entreat him to transfer his affection from herself to harriet , as infinitely the most worthy of the two or even the more simple sublimity of resolving to refuse him at once and for ever , without vouchsafing any motive , because he could not marry them both , emma had it not .
mr weston and mrs elton led the way , mr frank churchill and miss woodhouse followed .
it will be all mr frank churchill ;
she often says , when the letter is first opened , well , hetty , now i think you will be put to it to make out all that checker-work’ don’t you , ma’am ?
“ mr knightley and jane fairfax !
” said emma in a whisper .
the information was , as you state , that he was going to be married to a miss hawkins .
i congratulate you , mr weston , with all my heart , on the prospect of having one of the most lovely and accomplished young women in england for your daughter .
we have something to read you , something quite fresh .
for some time she was amused , without thinking beyond the immediate cause ;
united , what reverse we have !
such thorough worthy people !
“ well , ” said mrs weston , smiling , “ you give him credit for more simple , disinterested benevolence in this instance than i do ;
dear mrs elton , how elegant she looks !
“ the shame , ” he answered , “ is all mine , or ought to be .
i suppose you have heard and are come to give us joy .
she would not allow any other anxiety to succeed directly to the place in her mind which harriet had occupied .
if we exert ourselves , i think we shall not be long in want of allies .
it was true that she had not to charge herself , in this instance as in the former , with being the sole and original author of the mischief ;
you think you carry it off very well , i dare say , but with you it is a sort of bravado , an air of affected unconcern ;
it opens his designs to his family , it introduces you among them , it diffuses through the party those pleasantest feelings of our nature , eager curiosity and warm prepossession .
“ it is a sort of thing , ” cried mrs elton emphatically , “ which i should not have thought myself privileged to inquire into .
mr elton was called out of the room before tea , old john abdy’s son wanted to speak with him .
i am delighted to find that you can vouchsafe to let your imagination wander but it will not do very sorry to check you in your first essay but indeed it will not do .
“ you may depend upon me , ” said she .
“ i cannot rate her beauty as you do , ” said he ;
and if they misbehave , can give them a sharp word now and then ;
“ one ought to use the same caution , perhaps , in judging of the conduct of any one individual of any one family ;
i was late ;
now you have nothing to try for .
i was not disappointed ;
“ mrs weston’s manners , ” said emma , “ were always particularly good .
“ i hope you did not venture far , miss fairfax , this morning , or i am sure you must have been wet .
and that he would be able , without any doubt , to stay considerably longer with them than if he had come sooner .
sixteen years had miss taylor been in mr woodhouse’s family , less as a governess than a friend , very fond of both daughters , but particularly of emma .
“ if she is really ill , why not go to bath , mr weston ?
she laughed because she was disappointed ;
an arch look expressed “ i understand you well enough ;
for , though very eccentric , he had a thousand good qualities .
impossible !
when should i ever have thought of putting by in cotton a piece of court-plaister that frank churchill had been pulling about !
“ so unreasonably early !
but supposing any little inconvenience may be apprehended from the intimacy , it cannot be expected that emma , accountable to nobody but her father , who perfectly approves the acquaintance , should put an end to it , so long as it is a source of pleasure to herself .
it will be the only difference .
“ i see what a life i am to lead among you .
“ can you trust me with such flatterers ?
do not pity me till i reached highbury , and saw how ill i had made her .
and with a blush which shewed me how it was all connected , desired me , whenever i had an opportunity , to thank you i could not thank you too much for every wish and every endeavour to do her good .
here is my sketch of the fourth , who was a baby .
mr knightley does nothing mysteriously .
in short , my dear madam , it was a quarrel blameless on her side , abominable on mine ;
she means it , i know .
vanity , extravagance , love of change , restlessness of temper , which must be doing something , good or bad ;
“ that i am sure you would .
a whole evening of back-gammon with her father , was felicity to it .
it is a dreadful thing to have you forced to live there !
you had better look about you , and ascertain what you do , and what you mean to do .
“ and , upon my word , they have an air of great probability .
a few minutes more , and emma hoped to see one troublesome companion deposited in his own house , to get sober and cool , and the other recover his temper and happiness when this visit of hardship were over .
the chances are that she must be a gainer .
happier than i deserve .’ come , he knows himself there .
“ i was going to observe , sir , ” said frank churchill , “ that one of the great recommendations of this change would be the very little danger of any body’s catching cold so much less danger at the crown than at randalls !
“ but perhaps there might be some made to his coming back again .
for as to the subject which had first introduced it , the wonderful story of jane fairfax , that was quite sunk and lost .
a child on the watch , came towards them to beg ;
i never had the slightest suspicion , till within the last hour , of mr frank churchill’s having the least regard for jane fairfax .
i know it has .
and i think she wrote us word that he had shewn them some drawings of the place , views that he had taken himself .
robert martin is the man .
“ i have no doubt of his being a very respectable young man .
not at all , ” replied mr knightley , rather displeased ;
i pity you .
but it was a hard case to be obliged still to lower herself in his opinion .
“ none ;
and that he knew nothing of the matter , and had no voice at all , roundly asserted .
and on leaving randalls , and falling naturally into a comparison of the two men , she felt , that pleased as she had been to see frank churchill , and really regarding him as she did with friendship , she had never been more sensible of mr knightley’s high superiority of character .
offended , probably , by the little encouragement which her proposals of intimacy met with , she drew back in her turn and gradually became much more cold and distant ;
because for your own sake rather , i would wish it to be done , for the sake of what is more important than my comfort , a habit of self-command in you , a consideration of what is your duty , an attention to propriety , an endeavour to avoid the suspicions of others , to save your health and credit , and restore your tranquillity .
quite a simple thing .
“ ah !
not heard of you !
” said she ;
what totally different feelings did emma take back into the house from what she had brought out !
“ mrs gilbert does not mean to dance , but there is a young lady disengaged whom i should be very glad to see dancing miss smith .
she had reason to believe her nearly recovered from her cold , and it was desirable that she should have as much time as possible for getting the better of her other complaint before the gentleman’s return .
but he gave her pain , and his welfare twenty miles off would administer most satisfaction .
we are quite well .
it might be only her own consciousness ;
she did not do any of it in the same way that she used ;
i like a job of this kind excessively .’ which you know shewed him to be so very .
but mr woodhouse how was mr woodhouse to be induced to consent ?
mrs weston remained with mr woodhouse .
every body who spoke on the subject was equally convinced that it must come from colonel campbell , and equally rejoiced that such a present had been made ;
and had he known how hot a ride he should have , and how late , with all his hurry , he must be , he believed he should not have come at all .
i am sure she will be as happy to see her friends at highbury , as they can be to see her .
something of consequence so shocked !
“ ah !
“ upon my word , ” said emma , “ i begin to doubt my having any such talent .
they are good-natured people , and think little of their own claims ;
“ so seldom that any negligence or blunder appears !
but i never thought of that before .
while they talked , they were advancing towards the carriage ;
while he spoke , emma’s mind was most busy , and , with all the wonderful velocity of thought , had been able and yet without losing a word to catch and comprehend the exact truth of the whole ;
there has been a solemn engagement between them ever since october formed at weymouth , and kept a secret from every body .
contrary to the usual course of things , mr elton’s wanting to pay his addresses to her had sunk him in her opinion .
i know the danger of indulging such speculations .
he is a most amiable , charming young man , i believe .
nothing but a view at the end over a low stone wall with high pillars , which seemed intended , in their erection , to give the appearance of an approach to the house , which never had been there .
“ come , ” said she , “ i will tell you something , in return for what you have told me .
he came back gay and self-satisfied , eager and busy , caring nothing for miss woodhouse , and defying miss smith .
i do suspect that he is not really necessary to my happiness .
“ good god !
i am sure i must have been as white as my gown .
mr perry has been with her , as you probably heard .
you were very popular before you came , because you were mr weston’s son but lay out half a guinea at ford’s , and your popularity will stand upon your own virtues .
but with all the hopes of cheerfulness , and all the present comfort of delay , there was still such an evil hanging over her in the hour of explanation with harriet , as made it impossible for emma to be ever perfectly at ease .
“ do you dare say this ?
my dear , human flesh !
“ where could you possibly hear it , mr knightley ?
” said emma playfully .
she was stopped by a slight fit of coughing , and mr weston instantly seized the opportunity of going on .
and by the time they had talked it all over together , and he had talked it all over again with emma , in their walk back to hartfield , he was become perfectly reconciled , and not far from thinking it the very best thing that frank could possibly have done .
” they had both been out some time ;
but in her view it was a morning more completely misspent , more totally bare of rational satisfaction at the time , and more to be abhorred in recollection , than any she had ever passed .
i shall not be far off , if you want me .
and she was not satisfied with expressing a natural and reasonable admiration but without solicitation , or plea , or privilege , she must be wanting to assist and befriend her .
how do you do ?
“ you certainly will meet them if i can prevail ;
“ you would not have encouraged me , then , if you had understood me ?
i cannot at all consent to mr knightley’s marrying ;
“ if i understand your brother , he only means so far as your having some thoughts of marrying .
what were nine miles to a young man ?
harriet was very seldom mentioned between them .
in our communications we deal only in the great .
“ oh yes !
from our relative situation , those attentions were her due , and were felt to be so .
and mr dixon seems a very charming young man , quite worthy of him .
said something about “ honour , ” glanced at emma and at harriet , and then seeing the book open on the table , took it up , and examined it very attentively .
and that is all that can be said .
i know nothing ;
the housekeeper declared she knew nothing of my being expected .
very well , ” exclaimed miss bates , “ then i need not be uneasy .
“ here is something quite new to me .
emma’s eyes were instantly withdrawn ;
we had great amusement with those letters one morning .
he has not such a fine air and way of walking as mr knightley .
i wonder what will become of her !
absence , with the conviction probably of her indifference , had produced this very natural and very desirable effect .
mr elton , who might marry any body !
i will call another day , and hear the pianoforte .
i can see nothing at all extraordinary in him now .
he may , at times , be able to do a great deal more than he can at others .
emma was quite at a loss .
i could not have visited mrs robert martin , of abbey-mill farm .
and it is over and may never can never , as a first meeting , occur again , and therefore you need not think about it .
oh !’ said i , i shall not forestall jane ;
but from the confusion of my mind , and the multiplicity of business falling on me at once , my answer , instead of being sent with all the many other letters of that day , was locked up in my writing-desk ;
but not even i can charm away a sore throat ;
but , mr knightley , are you perfectly sure that she has absolutely and downright accepted him .
she must see you .
when they had been all walking together , he had so often come and walked by her , and talked so very delightfully !
“ how well they suit one another !
and she trusted to its bearing the same construction with him .
she thought it would be an excellent match ;
how much worse , had they been obliged to meet !
i was a kinder friend than you deserved .
“ shall i ring the bell ?
this moment , if you please .
” cried harriet , colouring , and astonished .
i have read worse charades .
how could she have been so brutal , so cruel to miss bates !
you will find how very much he suffers .
and it is so cheerful a place , that it could not fail of being of use to mr woodhouse’s spirits , which , i understand , are sometimes much depressed .
balls had they balls ?
i should myself have shrunk from any thing so hasty , and she would have felt every scruple of mine with multiplied strength and refinement .
.
and as to my dear little boys , i must say , that if aunt emma has not time for them , i do not think they would fare much better with uncle knightley , who is absent from home about five hours where she is absent one and who , when he is at home , is either reading to himself or settling his accounts .
weston churchill .
emma found that it was not mr weston’s fault that the number of privy councillors was not yet larger .
i have another person’s interest at present so much at heart , that i cannot think any longer about frank churchill .
whenever james goes over to see his daughter , you know , she will be hearing of us .
“ such a fortnight as it has been !
she believed he was looking at her ;
my first doth affliction denote , which my second is destin’d to feel and my whole is the best antidote that affliction to soften and heal .
.
such schemes as these are nothing without numbers .
“ very true .
and that’s so dreadful !
“ oh !
his gallantry was always on the alert .
when it came to such a pitch as this , she was not able to refrain from a start , or a heavy sigh , or even from walking about the room for a few seconds and the only source whence any thing like consolation or composure could be drawn , was in the resolution of her own better conduct , and the hope that , however inferior in spirit and gaiety might be the following and every future winter of her life to the past , it would yet find her more rational , more acquainted with herself , and leave her less to regret when it were gone .
i believe i have not played a bar this fortnight .
but so many were also moving , that she could not get away ;
mrs elton is very good-natured and agreeable , and i dare say her acquaintance are just what they ought to be .
but she flattered herself , that if divested of the danger of drawing her away , it might become an increase of comfort to him .
that was the glory of miss hawkins .
and they both went to quite the farther end of the shop ;
“ to be sure i am .
well , well , never mind .
and though denying the sentiment , emma was convinced that it had been so .
but they are things that i have valued very much .
mr weston certainly would never marry again .
consider how many of my dearest friends are now in brunswick square .
she gained on them , however , involuntarily :
do come in .
mr knightley’s words dwelt with her .
extremely disagreeable !
a worthy employment for a young lady’s mind !
there was always sufficient reason for such an attention ;
they were alike too , in a general benevolence of temper , and a strong habit of regard for every old acquaintance .
his quick eye she detected again and again glancing towards them with a happy expression ;
she was particularly struck by his manner of considering mr elton’s house , which , as well as the church , he would go and look at , and would not join them in finding much fault with .
from perfect misery to perfect happiness !
for though his income , by pay and appointments , was handsome , his fortune was moderate and must be all his daughter’s ;
mr weston might be his son’s superior .
however , i am very serious in not wishing any thing to be attempted at present for me .
“ very much to the honour of both , ” was the handsome reply .
” those were the words ;
but , first of all , i really must , in justice to jane , apologise for her writing so short a letter only two pages you see hardly two and in general she fills the whole paper and crosses half .
she opened the parlour door , and saw two gentlemen sitting with her father mr weston and his son .
i managed it extremely well .
” was a question , however , which did not augur much .
and , probably , in great measure , her husband also .
a few clever things said , a few downright silly , but by much the larger proportion neither the one nor the other nothing worse than everyday remarks , dull repetitions , old news , and heavy jokes .
jane was asked by somebody else , and he was still talking to mrs cole .
the son looked convinced .
i would not recommend an egg boiled by any body else ;
however , she called me back presently , and let me look too , which was very good-natured .
“ nonsense , errant nonsense , as ever was talked !
perhaps harriet might think her cold or angry if she did ;
she is very timid and silent .
and it may be a very fortunate circumstance for him , for frank , i mean , that he should have attached himself to a girl of such steadiness of character and good judgment as i have always given her credit for and still am disposed to give her credit for , in spite of this one great deviation from the strict rule of right .
her second duty now , inferior only to her father’s claims , was to promote harriet’s comfort , and endeavour to prove her own affection in some better method than by match-making .
“ i shall not scold you .
here is the rivet of your mistress’s spectacles out .
but i would have you so firmly established in good society , as to be independent even of hartfield and miss woodhouse .
i mean in person tall , and with that sort of look and not very talkative .
his father would not own himself uneasy , and laughed at her fears ;
“ are you talking about me ?
“ i can answer for every thing of that nature , sir , because it will be under mrs weston’s care .
she had been satisfied to hear and believe just what mrs goddard chose to tell her ;
miss smith , pray take care .
this topic was discussed very happily , and others succeeded of similar moment , and passed away with similar harmony ;
not frank ;
“ but i thought you would .
her daughter enjoyed a most uncommon degree of popularity for a woman neither young , handsome , rich , nor married .
with insufferable vanity had she believed herself in the secret of every body’s feelings ;
“ miss bates must not be forgotten :
where is she ?
how it would affect frank was among the earliest thoughts of both .
it was almost enough to make her think of marrying .
for evil in that quarter was at hand .
“ i have a great curiosity to see mrs elton , i have heard so much of her .
to complete every other recommendation , he had almost told her that he loved her .
he was too angry to say another word ;
did he ever give you any thing ?
how the trampers might have behaved , had the young ladies been more courageous , must be doubtful ;
“ yes , indeed , a very good letter , ” replied emma rather slowly “ so good a letter , harriet , that every thing considered , i think one of his sisters must have helped him .
it was ready ;
if miss taylor undertakes to wrap miss emma up , you need not have any fears , sir .’ how often have i heard you speak of it as such a compliment to her !
i am exceedingly obliged to you , mrs elton , i am obliged to any body who feels for me , but i am quite serious in wishing nothing to be done till the summer .
we shall enjoy him completely ;
why he should feel such a scruple , why he should change his mind when it was all but done , she could not perceive .
granted ;
hughes i declare and mrs hughes .
such long letters , you know , to be written to colonel campbell , and mrs dixon .
and left her at last tolerably comfortable , in the sweet dependence of his having a most comfortless visit , and of their all missing her very much .
but the humble , grateful little girl went off with highly gratified feelings , delighted with the affability with which miss woodhouse had treated her all the evening , and actually shaken hands with her at last !
jane , jane , look !
she was your governess , i think ?
and the first possible cause for it , suggested by her fears , was , that he had perhaps been communicating his plans to his brother , and was pained by the manner in which they had been received .
i say , jane , what a perfect character you and i should make , if we could be shaken together .
and his the greatest zeal in pursuing it ;
such was jane fairfax’s history .
there was consciousness , animation , and warmth ;
he does not think of the draught .
he was not fond of dining out .
“ which makes his good manners the more valuable .
“ indeed !
and instead of passing on , he stopt for several minutes at the two superior sashed windows which were open , to look in and contemplate its capabilities , and lament that its original purpose should have ceased .
will not the old prejudice be too strong ?
to those who had no resources it was a different thing ;
mr john knightley was a tall , gentleman-like , and very clever man ;
the friends from whom she had just parted , though very good sort of people , must be doing her harm .
sighs and fine words had been given in abundance ;
it then occurred to her to employ him in reading .
it was a clear thing he was less in love than he had been .
how could you be so insolent in your wit to a woman of her character , age , and situation ?
the coles had been settled some years in highbury , and were very good sort of people friendly , liberal , and unpretending ;
“ there can be no doubt of your being much more engaged with company than you used to be .
it did appear there was no concealing it exactly like the pretence of being in love with her , instead of harriet ;
yes , good man !
but she had the consolation of knowing that her intentions were good , and of being able to say to herself , that could mr knightley have been privy to all her attempts of assisting jane fairfax , could he even have seen into her heart , he would not , on this occasion , have found any thing to reprove .
mrs perry was always particularly fond of my mother indeed i do not know who is not and she had mentioned it to her in confidence ;
you would not wish to disappoint and mortify the coles , i am sure , sir ;
but , till this very day , she had never , for an instant , suspected it to mean any thing but grateful respect to her as harriet’s friend .
harriet had been at hartfield , as usual , soon after breakfast ;
she could not be complying , she dreaded being quarrelsome ;
ah !
neither could she feel any right of preference herself she submitted , therefore , and only questioned miss bates farther as to her niece’s appetite and diet , which she longed to be able to assist .
what would you advise me to do ?
he was delighted with every thing ;
“ our poor ball must be quite given up .
they would feel that they could trust him ;
keep your raptures for harriet’s face .
may its approval beam in that soft eye !
then i must have dreamt it but i was completely persuaded miss smith , you walk as if you were tired .
and even when particulars were given and families described , he was still unwilling to admit that the inconvenience of such a mixture would be any thing , or that there would be the smallest difficulty in every body’s returning into their proper place the next morning .
i thought unreasonably so :
“ i did not thoroughly understand what you were telling your brother , ” cried emma , “ about your friend mr graham’s intending to have a bailiff from scotland , to look after his new estate .
she was soon convinced that it was not for herself she was feeling at all apprehensive or embarrassed ;
but they did see him every day as it was .
mr and mrs john knightley were not detained long at hartfield .
they will come and stand by my chair , and say , grandpapa , can you give me a bit of string ?’ and once henry asked me for a knife , but i told him knives were only made for grandpapas .
she supposed she must say more before she were entitled to his clemency ;
and his coming now , depends upon her being willing to spare him .
when he was again in their company , he could not help remembering what he had seen ;
although in one instance the bearers of not good tidings , mr and mrs weston’s visit this morning was in another respect particularly opportune .
and the distresses of the poor were as sure of relief from her personal attention and kindness , her counsel and her patience , as from her purse .
you know we have settled all that already .
i am no young lady on her preferment .
he never wished to attach me .
but in general he was looking grave .
“ no , but it did not absolutely rain when i set out .
it certainly was very extraordinary !
i am doatingly fond of music passionately fond ;
i mean of late .
mr elton’s absence just at this time was the very thing to be desired .
“ it must be a severe trial to them all .
poor knightley !
mr perry is extremely concerned when any of us are ill .
she ran away to indulge the inclination , leaving the tender and the sublime of pleasure to harriet’s share .
(harriet could not recall it without a blush .) he seemed to be almost asking her , whether her affections were engaged .
after these came a second set ;
she was his object , and every body must perceive it .
that , i thought , in a man of known musical talent , was some proof .
my mother’s spectacles .
emma could not feel a doubt of having given harriet’s fancy a proper direction and raised the gratitude of her young vanity to a very good purpose , for she found her decidedly more sensible than before of mr elton’s being a remarkably handsome man , with most agreeable manners ;
i can never bear to think of you all there without me .
she doubted whether she had not transgressed the duty of woman by woman , in betraying her suspicions of jane fairfax’s feelings to frank churchill .
quite wonderful how she does her hair !
and every body by whom he was used to be guided assuring him that it would be for his happiness ;
and his being so much attached to me and his writing such a letter but as to leaving you , it is what i would not do upon any consideration .
i want to inquire after you all , but particularly your niece .
mr martin , i imagine , has his fortune entirely to make cannot be at all beforehand with the world .
if i could but have kept longer away !
and so off i set ;
this is not pleasant to you , emma and it is very far from pleasant to me ;
and i am sure our thanks are due to you , mrs weston , on that score .
but i was thinking of something very different at the time .
well , (returning to the room ,) i have not been able to succeed .
“ oh !
that robert martin had thoroughly supplanted mr knightley , and was now forming all her views of happiness .
i feel now as if i could think of nothing but these poor creatures all the rest of the day ;
she promised , however , to think of it ;
better wait an hour or two , or even half a day for your letters , than run the risk of bringing on your cough again .
frank was next to emma , jane opposite to them and mr knightley so placed as to see them all ;
very lucky marrying as they did , upon an acquaintance formed only in a public place !
the gipsies did not wait for the operations of justice ;
the morning of the interesting day arrived , and mrs weston’s faithful pupil did not forget either at ten , or eleven , or twelve o’clock , that she was to think of her at four .
you are not aware of the difficulty of procuring exactly the desirable thing .
either bathing has been of the greatest service to her , or else it is to be attributed to an excellent embrocation of mr wingfield’s , which we have been applying at times ever since august .
“ what is it my dear friend ?
as for his going , emma did not wish him to think it possible , the hours would be too late , and the party too numerous .
harriet was very ready to speak of the share he had had in their moonlight walks and merry evening games ;
the sixteen miles being happily accomplished , and mr and mrs john knightley , their five children , and a competent number of nursery-maids , all reaching hartfield in safety .
“ he advances inch by inch , and will hazard nothing till he believes himself secure .
“ you are materially changed since we talked on this subject before .
he argued like a young man very much bent on dancing ;
emma , in good spirits too , from the amusement afforded her mind by the expectation of mr frank churchill , was willing to forget his late improprieties , and be as well satisfied with him as before , and on his making harriet his very first subject , was ready to listen with most friendly smiles .
“ my emma !
behind it was another with which it immediately communicated ;
i have quite a horror of upstarts .
“ it is my duty , and i am sure it is my wish , ” she continued , “ to have no reserves with you on this subject .
i shall press you no more .
it has hurt me , emma , very much .
“ no , not now , i thank you .
he thought it very well done of mr knightley to invite them very kind and sensible much cleverer than dining out .
she must wait a moment , or he would think her mad .
he was in high spirits ;
and altogether , having seen nobody better (that must have been his great assistant) she might not , while she was at abbey-mill , find him disagreeable .
indeed , when the time draws on , i shall decidedly recommend their bringing the barouche-landau ;
but a very short parley with her own heart produced the most solemn resolution of never quitting her father .
but it should be so no more .
harriet certainly was not clever , but she had a sweet , docile , grateful disposition , was totally free from conceit , and only desiring to be guided by any one she looked up to .
“ a very fine young man indeed , mr weston .
the rest of the party were now returning , and all were soon collected .
go and eat and drink a little more , and you will do very well .
having arranged all these matters , looked them through , and put them all to rights , she was just turning to the house with spirits freshened up for the demands of the two little boys , as well as of their grandpapa , when the great iron sweep-gate opened , and two persons entered whom she had never less expected to see together frank churchill , with harriet leaning on his arm actually harriet !
“ well , well , i have that note ;
your dear mother was so clever at all those things !
they would be estimated very differently by others as well as myself ;
this was the knowledge of herself , on the first question of inquiry , which she reached ;
but five minutes were enough to familiarise the idea to his quickness of mind .
and with this resemblance of her father , she inherited also much of his constitution ;
dinner was on table .
mr elton is good-humoured , cheerful , obliging , and gentle .
a large debt of gratitude was owing here ;
and it will be a great comfort to poor miss taylor to have somebody about her that she is used to see .
“ he had seen a group of old acquaintance in the street as he passed he had not stopped , he would not stop for more than a word but he had the vanity to think they would be disappointed if he did not call , and much as he wished to stay longer at hartfield , he must hurry off .
“ do you ?
harriet smith has some first-rate qualities , which mrs elton is totally without .
better weather ;
not a word , if you please .
what is to become of that ?
composure with a witness !
and when he had reached such a point as this , she could not wonder at her brother-in-law’s breaking out .
and jane will have such another .
and though she liked him for his attentions , and thought them all , whether in friendship , admiration , or playfulness , extremely judicious , they were not winning back her heart .
“ oftentimes very convenient , no doubt , but never pleasing .
better not move at all , better stay in london altogether than travel forty miles to get into a worse air .
however , she seems a very obliging , pretty-behaved young lady , and no doubt will make him a very good wife .
one of them quite as large as mrs goddard’s drawing-room ;
this event had very lately taken place ;
“ did you ever see such a skin ?
captain weston was a general favourite ;
she was then obliged to be finished , and make her appearance .
when emma afterwards heard that jane fairfax had been seen wandering about the meadows , at some distance from highbury , on the afternoon of the very day on which she had , under the plea of being unequal to any exercise , so peremptorily refused to go out with her in the carriage , she could have no doubt putting every thing together that jane was resolved to receive no kindness from her .
or , if not quite the luckiest , to yield only to herself .
she still intended him for her friend .
“ no , to be sure you could not ;
he was invited on good faith .
mr knightley and harriet smith !
“ that may be done without horses .
“ i was with mr cole on business an hour and a half ago .
the woman was better off ;
“ there is no saying much for the delicacy of our good friends , the eltons , ” was his next observation .
.
and she was herself struck by his warmth .
liberal allowances were made for the little excesses of such a handsome young man one who smiled so often and bowed so well ;
and as mrs elton met her with unusual graciousness , she hoped the rencontre would do them no harm .
it was to be a whole-length in water-colours , like mr john knightley’s , and was destined , if she could please herself , to hold a very honourable station over the mantelpiece .
it spoke such perfect amity .
“ oh !
his figure , and look , and situation in life seem to allow it ;
it was a happy circumstance , and animated mr woodhouse for some time .
how shall you employ yourself when you grow old ?
that she meant to shine and be very superior , but with manners which had been formed in a bad school , pert and familiar ;
this was obliged to be repeated before it could be believed ;
they must not over-salt the leg ;
” though his own sparkling eyes at the moment were speaking a very different conviction .
but we are so remarkably airy !
it must be waded through , however .
i do not see it .
“ time , my dearest emma , time will heal the wound .
and now i come to the principal , the only important part of my conduct while belonging to you , which excites my own anxiety , or requires very solicitous explanation .
“ we had better move on , mr weston , ” said she , “ we are detaining the girls .
she could dwell on it all with the utmost delight .
” and the gentlemen perhaps thought each to himself , “ women will have their little nonsenses and needless cares .
i feel it so very due .
i left them there and came on to hartfield , impatient for your opinion , and hoping you might be persuaded to join them and give your advice on the spot .
i must make myself very disagreeable , or she would not have said such a thing to an old friend .
all the advantages of sitting still when he ought to move , and of leading a life of mere idle pleasure , and fancying himself extremely expert in finding excuses for it .
he listened in perfect silence .
this made a difficulty .
“ oh , mrs churchill ;
“ oh !
one could not leave her out .
“ it is not now worth a regret , ” said emma .
then , don’t speak it , don’t speak it , ” she eagerly cried .
i remember she said she was sorry we never met now ;
kitty , a fair but frozen maid , kindled a flame i yet deplore , the hood-wink’d boy i called to aid , though of his near approach afraid , so fatal to my suit before .
“ i should have been sorry , mr knightley , to be dependent on your recommendation , had i quitted mr woodhouse’s family and wanted another situation ;
mrs elton , as elegant as lace and pearls could make her , he looked at in silence wanting only to observe enough for isabella’s information but miss fairfax was an old acquaintance and a quiet girl , and he could talk to her .
“ i shall be very glad to look it over , ” said he ;
and the tree is touched with such inimitable spirit !
if he were quite sincere , if he really tried to come , it was to be inferred that mrs churchill’s removal to london had been of no service to the wilful or nervous part of her disorder .
and so does poor mrs weston ” with half a sigh and half a smile at her .
nay , he appeared so much otherwise , that his daughter’s courage failed .
was it new for any thing in this world to be unequal , inconsistent , incongruous or for chance and circumstance (as second causes) to direct the human fate ?
i have often known it done myself .
she heard nothing but the instant reply of , “ beg her to walk up ;
but otherwise his friend cole had been saying so much about his dining with him had made such a point of it , that he had promised him conditionally to come .
poor mr woodhouse little suspected what was plotting against him in the breast of that man whom he was so cordially welcoming , and so anxiously hoping might not have taken cold from his ride .
and mrs weston gave emma a look of particular meaning .
we are reconciled , dearer , much dearer , than ever , and no moment’s uneasiness can ever occur between us again .
you have drawn two pretty pictures ;
they were stopping , however , in the first place at mrs bates’s ;
but still as he is , beyond a doubt , really attached to miss fairfax , and will soon , it may be hoped , have the advantage of being constantly with her , i am very ready to believe his character will improve , and acquire from hers the steadiness and delicacy of principle that it wants .
“ yes , here i am , my good friend ;
but i hope , miss woodhouse , that supposing that if strange as it may appear .
but you knew what a dutiful creature you had to deal with .
“ i wish , ” said mrs weston , “ one could know which arrangement our guests in general would like best .
“ yes , ” said jane , “ we heard his kind offers , we heard every thing .
don’t let her imagine that you have spoken of her as a pretty young woman .
and very much to the purpose .
but he was fully convinced , that no reflection could alter his wishes or his opinion on the subject .
we have nothing clever to say not one of us .
“ oh !
but i can say , that i have never known the blessing of one tranquil hour :’ and the quivering lip , emma , which uttered it , was an attestation that i felt at my heart .
“ mr martin !
there would be a mrs knightley to throw cold water on every thing .
“ to be sure !
would jane but go , means were to be found , servants sent , friends contrived no travelling difficulty allowed to exist ;
i see it in her cheek , her smile , her vain attempt to frown .
that is , if i may presume to call myself an addition .
so full , that when the candles came to assist his observations , he must yes , he certainly must , as a friend an anxious friend give emma some hint , ask her some question .
and harriet , who had taken the first hint of it from her , hoped , with miss woodhouse’s help , to get a great many more .
and yet it was far , very far , from impossible .
and i do not know whether miss bates is not as likely to understand the inclinations of the rest of the people as any body .
” said he quietly , and looking at her ;
and that at one time they were in such a crowd , as to make miss smith rather uneasy .
and even were this not the case , he would never have known harriet at all but for her folly .
she has been gone longer already than she intended .
cost her what it would , she would listen .
she would not acknowledge that it was with any view of making a match for her , hereafter , with either of isabella’s sons ;
harriet , tempted by every thing and swayed by half a word , was always very long at a purchase ;
emma felt that mrs weston was giving her a momentary glance ;
“ and after all , five couple are not enough to make it worth while to stand up .
the very day of mr elton’s going to london produced a fresh occasion for emma’s services towards her friend .
ha !
how harriet could ever have had the presumption to raise her thoughts to mr knightley !
whatever money he might come into when his father died , whatever his share of the family property , it is , i dare say , all afloat , all employed in his stock , and so forth ;
jane’s alertness in moving , proved her as ready as her aunt had preconceived .
how clearly they had seemed to point at harriet .
how many a man has committed himself on a short acquaintance , and rued it all the rest of his life !
so , as soon as mr weston came into the room , and i could get at him , i spoke to him about the carriage .
“ if i know myself , harriet , mine is an active , busy mind , with a great many independent resources ;
she saw it all with a clearness which had never blessed her before .
mr perry could not quite understand him , but he was very sure there must be a lady in the case , and he told him so ;
she must understand you .
a fine open sea , he says , and very pure air .
thy ready wit the word will soon supply , may its approval beam in that soft eye !
and she found herself therefore obliged to consent to an arrangement which she would have done a great deal to avoid ;
and here i can admit , that my manners to miss w .
both felt rather anxious to hear him speak again ;
and feeling that , unmerited as might be the degree of his fond affection and confiding esteem , she could not , in her general conduct , be open to any severe reproach .
the brothers talked of their own concerns and pursuits , but principally of those of the elder , whose temper was by much the most communicative , and who was always the greater talker .
and emma thought she could so pack it as to ensure its safety without much incommoding him , while he seemed mostly fearful of not being incommoded enough .
for having been a valetudinarian all his life , without activity of mind or body , he was a much older man in ways than in years ;
however , i do really think mr martin a very amiable young man , and have a great opinion of him ;
it is such a happiness when good people get together and they always do .
soft is the very word for her eye of all epithets , the justest that could be given .
such as that , if she came home cold , she would be sure to warm herself thoroughly ;
she saw , that in persuading herself , in fancying , in acting to the contrary , she had been entirely under a delusion , totally ignorant of her own heart and , in short , that she had never really cared for frank churchill at all !
emma amused herself by protesting that it was very extraordinary , indeed , and that she had not a syllable to say for him .
but he knows you very well indeed i mean by sight .
birth , abilities , and education , had been equally marking one as an associate for her , to be received with gratitude ;
he asked my opinion as to what he was now to do .
pleasant rides ?
you would not have been so long in coming , if you had had a pleasant idea of highbury .
“ they told me that mr martin dined with them last saturday .
and , indeed , though my mother’s eyes are not so good as they were , she can see amazingly well still , thank god !
but ,’ said i , to be quite honest , i do not think i can live without something of a musical society .
isabella slow and diffident .
“ it is not worth while , harriet , to give mrs ford the trouble of two parcels .
i could not bear it for emma !
i used to be quite angry with selina ;
she could then see more and judge better .
“ had you any idea , ” cried harriet , “ of his being in love with her ?
harriet is my superior in all the charm and all the felicity it gives .
and at the same moment mr cole approaching to entreat miss woodhouse would do them the honour of trying it .
“ my dear mr e .
every part of it brought pain and humiliation , of some sort or other ;
good fires and carriages would be much more to the purpose in most cases of delicate health , and i dare say in her’s .
she had herself been first with him for many years past .
we must not be nice and ask for all the virtues into the bargain .
not immediately here .
but the two latest occurrences to be mentioned , the two of strongest promise to harriet , were not without some degree of witness from emma herself .
i have now a key to all her odd looks and ways .
but at last emma collected from her enough to understand the sort of meeting , and the sort of pain it was creating .
harriet submitted , though her mind could hardly separate the parts , so as to feel quite sure that her friend were not writing down a declaration of love .
“ but we shall be indulgent especially to any one who leads the way .
i am sure he has not the least idea of it .
quite well , i am much obliged to you .
he should have respected even unreasonable scruples , had there been such ;
it was weather which might fairly confine every body at home ;
and mrs elton , in all her apparatus of happiness , her large bonnet and her basket , was very ready to lead the way in gathering , accepting , or talking strawberries , and only strawberries , could now be thought or spoken of .
a note from mrs weston to herself , ushered in the letter from frank to mrs weston .
a little , perhaps , from that wickedness on my side which was prone to take disgust towards a girl so idolized and so cried up as she always was , by her aunt and grandmother , and all their set .
nothing can be more kind or pressing than their joint invitation , jane says , as you will hear presently ;
mr weston was a man of unexceptionable character , easy fortune , suitable age , and pleasant manners ;
they seemed more like cheerful , easy friends , than lovers .
they can do nothing satisfactorily without you .
“ so scrupulous for others , ” he continued , “ and yet so careless for herself !
and half an hour stolen afterwards to go over the same ground again with him , literally and figuratively , was quite necessary to reinstate her in a proper share of the happiness of the evening before .
“ well , ” said mrs weston , laughing , “ perhaps the greatest good he could do them , would be to give jane such a respectable home .
no ” and emma could just catch the words , “ so superior to mr elton !
let me know it all .
she could not have believed it possible that the taste or the pride of miss fairfax could endure such society and friendship as the vicarage had to offer .
the young ladies of highbury might have walked again in safety before their panic began , and the whole history dwindled soon into a matter of little importance but to emma and her nephews :
we must allow for the effect of shade , you know .
the carriage we had disappointments about the carriage ;
there is no comparison between them .
“ well !
but it would be better than a common meeting in a crowd .
“ well , ” said she , “ and you soon silenced mr cole , i suppose ?
the whole system of whose treatment of her , by the bye , has ever filled me with indignation and hatred .
invite him to dinner , emma , and help him to the best of the fish and the chicken , but leave him to chuse his own wife .
“ me , my love , ” cried his wife , hearing and understanding only in part .
i know we agreed never to name him but considering how infinitely superior he is to every body else , i should not have thought it possible that i could be supposed to mean any other person .
and on mr perry’s coming in soon after dinner , with a disengaged hour to give her father , she lost no time in hurrying into the shrubbery .
and could say at last , poor man !
but as to all that , i am very indifferent ;
i thought you cleverer for , depend upon it a lucky guess is never merely luck .
mr knightley and harriet !
“ him !
an excellent precaution .
nothing should separate her from her father .
she heard patty announcing it ;
i can much more readily enter into the temptation of getting away from miss bates , than i can believe in the triumph of miss fairfax’s mind over mrs elton .
he went to highbury the next morning , and satisfied himself on that point .
that is what she writes about .
he was soon pretty well resigned .
“ if so , you must extend your suspicions and comprehend mr dixon in them .
” turning away distressed .
they walked on .
mr weston’s ball was to be a real thing .
it was a child’s play , chosen to conceal a deeper game on frank churchill’s part .
and that he did mention , without its being much to the purpose , that on quitting their box at astley’s , my brother took charge of mrs john knightley and little john , and he followed with miss smith and henry ;
it was owing to her persuasion , as she thought his being out in bad weather did him a great deal of harm .
but this could not be expected to happen very early .
and the voices of the ladies were drowned for a while , till another suspension brought mrs elton’s tones again distinctly forward .
emma even jumped with surprize ;
miss nash had been telling her something , which she repeated immediately with great delight .
she is the natural daughter of nobody knows whom , with probably no settled provision at all , and certainly no respectable relations .
“ i do not often walk this way now , ” said emma , as they proceeded , “ but then there will be an inducement , and i shall gradually get intimately acquainted with all the hedges , gates , pools and pollards of this part of highbury .
emma wished to go to work directly , and therefore produced the portfolio containing her various attempts at portraits , for not one of them had ever been finished , that they might decide together on the best size for harriet .
the blunders , the blindness of her own head and heart !
em-ma .
go to-day , go to-day .
mrs weston laughed , and said he did not know what he was talking about .
they are not far off .
for harriet had acknowledged her admiration and preference of frank churchill before she had ever given her a hint on the subject ;
she would not look again .
.
an airing in the hartfield carriage would have been the rack , and arrowroot from the hartfield storeroom must have been poison .
i am sure we do .
it was accepted ;
i will answer for the gentleman’s indifference .
she lived with her single daughter in a very small way , and was considered with all the regard and respect which a harmless old lady , under such untoward circumstances , can excite .
while he lived , it must be only an engagement ;
” she cried , looking aghast .
its tendency would be to raise and refine her mind and it must be saving her from the danger of degradation .
and now he confessed his persuasion , that such a transplantation would be a risk of her father’s comfort , perhaps even of his life , which must not be hazarded .
you saw her with the campbells , when she was the equal of every body she mixed with , but here she is with a poor old grandmother , who has barely enough to live on .
absolutely insufferable !
or , perhaps she may not have resources enough in herself to be qualified for a country life .
i smile because you smile , and shall probably suspect whatever i find you suspect ;
this is feeling your way .
very true .
there is a littleness about him which you discovered , and which i did not :
soup too !
i shall not commit myself by claiming more than she may chuse to allow .
sir but a thoughtless young person will sometimes step behind a window-curtain , and throw up a sash , without its being suspected .
former intimacy might sink without remark .
now , as her objection was nothing but her very great dislike of mrs elton , of which mr weston must already be perfectly aware , it was not worth bringing forward again :
i should not mind walking half the way .
but she fully intended that mr elton should close it .
it was known that they were a little acquainted ;
she chose rather to take up her own line of the subject again .
she read it to him , just as he liked to have any thing read , slowly and distinctly , and two or three times over , with explanations of every part as she proceeded and he was very much pleased , and , as she had foreseen , especially struck with the complimentary conclusion .
emma pondered a moment , and then replied , “ i will not pretend not to understand you ;
“ and i , mr knightley , am equally stout in my confidence of its not doing them any harm .
” said she , beginning again when they were all in the street .
had it taken place only once a year , it would have been a grievance .
there was no immediate appearance .
“ thank you , dear miss woodhouse , you are all kindness .
and while the sleek , well-tied parcels of “ men’s beavers ” and “ york tan ” were bringing down and displaying on the counter , he said “ but i beg your pardon , miss woodhouse , you were speaking to me , you were saying something at the very moment of this burst of my amor patriae .
express perfection !
mr perry did say so .
” and he smiled with such seeming pleasure at the conviction , that she must proceed another step .
and extremely fortunate we may think ourselves that it did not begin yesterday , and prevent this day’s party , which it might very possibly have done , for mr woodhouse would hardly have ventured had there been much snow on the ground ;
“ upon my word , ” she cried , “ the young man is determined not to lose any thing for want of asking .
she seemed bent on giving no real insight into mr dixon’s character , or her own value for his company , or opinion of the suitableness of the match .
how could he tell that he might not be making me in love with him ?
we have never been there above once since the new approach was made ;
but mrs dixon must be very much disappointed .
it was the very circumstance he could have wished for .
so i just mentioned .
“ mr martin , i suppose , is not a man of information beyond the line of his own business ?
but the expression is hardly admissible , mrs weston , is it ?
this letter tells us it is a short letter written in a hurry , merely to give us notice it tells us that they are all coming up to town directly , on mrs churchill’s account she has not been well the whole winter , and thinks enscombe too cold for her so they are all to move southward without loss of time .
short letters from frank were received at randalls , communicating all that was immediately important of their state and plans .
she is as low as possible .
but there is no making children of three or four years old stand still you know ;
when he was speaking of it in that way , i honestly said that the world i could give up parties , balls , plays for i had no fear of retirement .
he began stopping , however , almost directly to say , “ had i been offered the sight of one of this gentleman’s letters to his mother-in-law a few months ago , emma , it would not have been taken with such indifference .
my plea of concealing the truth she did not think sufficient .
“ dear emma bears every thing so well , ” said her father .
“ she must have some motive , more powerful than appears , for refusing this invitation , ” was emma’s conclusion .
“ but mr knightley does not want to marry .
“ the old lady !
and i think she feels it .
a hasty and imprudent attachment may arise but there is generally time to recover from it afterwards .
mr elton must now be left to himself .
consider from how partial a quarter your information came .
from harriet’s manner of speaking of the circumstance before they quitted the ballroom , she had strong hopes .
.
and now it had happened to the very person , and at the very hour , when the other very person was chancing to pass by to rescue her !
” emma smiled , and felt that mr weston had very good reason for saying so .
she had resolution enough to pursue her own will in spite of her brother , but not enough to refrain from unreasonable regrets at that brother’s unreasonable anger , nor from missing the luxuries of her former home .
and if he had intended to give her one , he would have told her so .
mr knightley’s excessive curiosity to know what this word might be , made him seize every possible moment for darting his eye towards it , and it was not long before he saw it to be dixon .
“ certainly , if you wish it ;
“ i was wrong , ” he continued , “ in talking of its being broke to you .
caution for him and for herself would be necessary .
i hope you will be pleased with my son ;
she has sunk from the comforts she was born to ;
for her own advantage indeed , it was fit that the utmost extent of harriet’s hopes should be enquired into ;
and two days afterwards i received a parcel from her , my own letters all returned !
which was properly denied ;
i do not look upon him to be quite the sort of man i do not altogether build upon his steadiness or constancy .
the impression of it is strong on my memory .
frank churchill seemed to have been on the watch ;
mr woodhouse was soon ready for his tea ;
see her and hear her no , i am afraid you will not hear her at all , for she has an aunt who never holds her tongue .
as a counsellor she was not wanted ;
but mr knightley was so obliging as to put up with it , and seek no farther explanation .
i assure you i have .
the quarter of an hour brought her punctually to the white gate again ;
there is a good deal of nonsense in it but the part which is capable of being communicated , which is sense , is , that they are as far from any attachment or admiration for one another , as any two beings in the world can be .
at present , there was nothing to be done for harriet ;
it was rather because she felt less happy than she had expected .
and happy was she , for her father’s sake , in the power ;
and as it is some months since miss campbell married , the impression may be a little worn off .
(with a little sigh of sentiment) .
i would rather walk .
those who are standing by are usually thinking of something very different .
did you speak to me ?
“ thank you , but i would rather you did not mention the subject to her ;
they were all three walking about together for an hour or two first round the shrubberies of hartfield , and afterwards in highbury .
either in the morning or evening of every day , excepting one , have we seen either mr weston or mrs weston , and generally both , either at randalls or here and as you may suppose , isabella , most frequently here .
emma returned her friend’s pressure with interest ;
miss hawkins perhaps wanted a home , and thought this the best offer she was likely to have .
it was made a great favour of ;
i have not the least idea of his being a weak young man :
it is very difficult for the prosperous to be humble .
i am rather proud of little george .
and from us i really think , my dear jane , you can have no scruple to accept such an accommodation .
“ engaged since october , secretly engaged .
emma felt her foot pressed by mrs weston , and did not herself know what to think .
and its happy effect on his spirits was immediate .
i knew it was but had not resolution enough to part with them .
he wanted to marry well , and having the arrogance to raise his eyes to her , pretended to be in love ;
yes , i immediately perceive that it must be the joint present of mr and mrs dixon .
do you think it is a good one ?
the misfortune of your birth ought to make you particularly careful as to your associates .
and he did know that she would have prevented the instrument’s coming if she could .
i must tell you what an unlucky thing happened to me , as to that .
they were interrupted .
in half a minute they were together .
entered into their troubles with ready sympathy , and always gave her assistance with as much intelligence as good-will .
miss woodhouse , i am quite concerned , i am sure you hit your foot .
pleasant walks ?
so then , i try to put it out of her thoughts , and say , come ma’am , do not let us think about it any more .
i do not know who would ever look at him in the company of the other .
in what respect ?
i will keep my ill-humour to myself .
what are you proud of ?
chuse your own degree of crossness .
this letter must make its way to emma’s feelings .
“ but i cannot think of any tolerable pretence for going in ;
the woodhouses were first in consequence there .
a little curiosity emma had ;
and , i dare say , left the house thinking me the best friend and counsellor man ever had .
no , ” said he ;
tea was carrying round , and mr weston , having said all that he wanted , soon took the opportunity of walking away .
it seemed quite a shame , especially considering how many houses there are where fine instruments are absolutely thrown away .
it is a handsome present .
it does relate to him , and i will tell you directly ;
but , mr knightley , how could you possibly have heard it ?
nobody was ever so fortunate as herself !’ but with many , many thanks there was no occasion to trouble us , for mr knightley’s carriage had brought , and was to take them home again .’ i was quite surprized ;
she did not wish to speak of the pianoforte , she felt too much in the secret herself , to think the appearance of curiosity or interest fair , and therefore purposely kept at a distance ;
every distinguishing attention that could be paid , was paid to her .
her heart was grieved for a state which seemed but the more pitiable from this sort of irritation of spirits , inconsistency of action , and inequality of powers ;
and i laughed at him about it , but he said not a word that could betray .
oh !
the shower was heavy , but short ;
“ nobody ever did think well of the churchills , i fancy , ” observed mr john knightley coolly .
every body last night said how well you played .
it will be taking out my freedom .
it would be a secret satisfaction ;
how how has it been possible ?
“ pray , mr knightley , ” said emma , who had been smiling to herself through a great part of this speech , “ how do you know that mr martin did not speak yesterday ?
and of their having eight cows , two of them alderneys , and one a little welch cow , a very pretty little welch cow indeed ;
she had a moment’s fear of miss bates keeping away from her .
but sometimes of an evening , before we went to cards , he would read something aloud out of the elegant extracts , very entertaining .
do come in .
he is an excellent young man , both as son and brother .
” cried emma , collecting herself resolutely “ let us understand each other now , without the possibility of farther mistake .
“ our amiable young man is a very weak young man , if this be the first occasion of his carrying through a resolution to do right against the will of others .
and the bell was rung , and the carriages spoken for .
the listeners were amused ;
a fine place , but very retired .
you know you could not .
“ but , my dear child , the time is drawing near ;
emma perceived that her taste was not the only taste on which mr weston depended , and felt , that to be the favourite and intimate of a man who had so many intimates and confidantes , was not the very first distinction in the scale of vanity .
no suspicious flourishes now of apology or concern ;
it soon flies over the present failure , and begins to hope again .
emma listened , and then coolly said , “ i shall not be satisfied , unless he comes .
and colonel and mrs campbell think she does quite right , just what they should recommend ;
if ever there were people who , without having great wealth themselves , had every thing they could wish for , i am sure it is us .
considering the very superior claims of the object , it ought ;
there is to be no form or parade a sort of gipsy party .
mr woodhouse taken from hartfield !
but it is not every man’s fate to marry the woman who loves him best .
he is going to kingston .
he could not yet do more ;
but consider you need not be afraid of delegating power to me .
you are wise but i cannot be wise .
frank churchill had danced once at highbury , and longed to dance again ;
not that i had any doubt before i have so often heard mr woodhouse recommend a baked apple .
mr weston , always alert when business was to be done , and as incapable of procrastinating any evil that was inevitable , as of foreseeing any that was doubtful , said , “ it was time to go ;
and mr perry had remonstrated with him about it , and told him how shabby it was in him , their best player , to absent himself , and tried very much to persuade him to put off his journey only one day ;
but no plea was necessary ;
weston and cole will be there too ;
and said , looking so very significantly at her , “ that she did not pretend to understand what his business might be , but she only knew that any woman whom mr elton could prefer , she should think the luckiest woman in the world ;
“ i am only waiting for my friend .
you know i cannot .
and within a few minutes were joined by the contents of another carriage , which emma could not hear the sound of at first , without great surprize .
i shall always have a great regard for the miss martins , especially elizabeth , and should be very sorry to give them up , for they are quite as well educated as me .
“ yes , he has been gone just four weeks , as you observe , miss woodhouse , ” said miss bates , “ four weeks yesterday .
while he staid , the martins were forgotten ;
and i particularly wanted to see knightley to-day on that very account .
she heard enough to know that mr weston was giving some information about his son ;
but that mrs weston did not like it , was clear enough , by her passing it over as quickly as possible , and making no other comment than that “ all young people would have their little whims .
no i never conceived you could become indifferent .
“ no more it is .
mr churchill was better than could be expected ;
“ oh !
there was not a hint of mr martin .
this was mr elton !
this would be a trial .
harriet’s sweet easy temper will not mind it .
“ if you please , my dear .
i hope you turned directly .
i assure you , jane fairfax is a very delightful character , and interests me more than i can express .
you will not see him .
“ when miss smiths and mr eltons get acquainted they do indeed and really it is strange ;
nothing of the sort had ever occurred before to any young ladies in the place , within her memory ;
why not say upon your honour , that it has nothing to do with any of them ?
i never hear better sense from any one than robert martin .
as i am happily quite an altered creature in one respect , it is very fit that you should have the satisfaction of knowing it .
to be always doing more than she wished , and less than she ought !
i shall see you at the abbey to-morrow morning i hope , and then we will look them over , and you shall give me your opinion .
your time has been properly and delicately spent , if you have been endeavouring for the last four years to bring about this marriage .
“ miss fairfax was not well enough to write ;
” replied emma , unable to guess , by look or voice , whether harriet could indeed have received any hint .
she had no sense of superiority then .
“ i do pity you .
but she had believed them to be well-meaning , worthy people before ;
miss bates and miss fairfax , escorted by the two gentlemen , walked into the room ;
i hoped i was perfectly equal to any sacrifice of that description .
this , harriet , is an alliance which can never raise a blush in either of us .
but the quiet prosings of three such women made her feel that every evening so spent was indeed one of the long evenings she had fearfully anticipated .
“ he ought to come , ” said emma .
such an overthrow of every thing she had been wishing for !
he did so , but very soon stopt again to say , “ the pianoforte !
selina’s choice handsome , i think , but i do not know whether it is not over-trimmed ;
i am going to london , to spend a few days with john and isabella .
plain dealing was always best .
and i think i can give you a proof that it must be so .
while he was so dull , it was no wonder that harriet should be dull likewise ;
emma was more than half in hopes of mr elton’s having dropt a hint .
“ but she is so amusing , so extremely amusing !
ah !
here , she must be leading a life of privation and penance ;
here mr weston joined them , and on hearing what was proposed , gave it his decided approbation .
i really must talk to him about purchasing a donkey .
my dear miss woodhouse i come quite over-powered .
methodical , or well arranged , or very well delivered , it could not be expected to be ;
poor man !
but i think there may be a third a something between the do-nothing and the do-all .
” she cried in evident embarrassment , “ it all meant nothing ;
the considerable slope , at nearly the foot of which the abbey stood , gradually acquired a steeper form beyond its grounds ;
“ four o’clock !
i always say this is quite one of the evils of matrimony .
i wish you could have heard her honouring your forbearance , in being able to pay her such attentions , as she was for ever receiving from yourself and your father , when her society must be so irksome .
but she saw in it only increase of happiness to all , and had no scruple in urging him to the utmost .
harriet , mr elton , and mr knightley , their own especial set , were the only persons invited to meet them ;
“ you are prepared for the worst , i see and very bad it is .
” exclaimed emma .
to youth and natural cheerfulness like emma’s , though under temporary gloom at night , the return of day will hardly fail to bring return of spirits .
“ but you have not seen so much of the world as i have .
then she is no rule for mrs churchill , who is as thorough a fine lady as any body ever beheld .
and she went through it very well , with all the interest and all the commendation that could be requisite , and always putting forward to prevent harriet’s being obliged to say a word .
this was the occurrence :
“ how much his business engrosses him already is very plain from the circumstance of his forgetting to inquire for the book you recommended .
but that one would not wish to slight .
“ you and miss smith , and miss fairfax , will be three , and the two miss coxes five , ” had been repeated many times over .
early , i know , you had none .
“ i am not supposing him at all an unnatural creature , in suspecting that he may have learnt to be above his connexions , and to care very little for any thing but his own pleasure , from living with those who have always set him the example of it .
there were the pencilled marks and memorandums on the wainscot by the window .
“ if i loved you less , i might be able to talk about it more .
nobody could be so imprudent !
she is playing robin adair at this moment his favourite .
i hope she caught no cold last night .
look at my shoes .
“ mr weston will be almost as much relieved as myself , ” said she .
do not let me lose it .
“ he appears rough to you , ” said emma , “ because you are so very gentle yourself ;
of course she heard every thing he might be telling miss campbell about his own home in ireland ;
emma continued to entertain no doubt of her being in love .
plain as it can be .
without scruple without apology without much apparent diffidence , mr elton , the lover of harriet , was professing himself her lover .
if you knew how much i love every thing that is decided and open !
for mrs perry herself mentioned it to my mother , and the coles knew of it as well as ourselves but it was quite a secret , known to nobody else , and only thought of about three days .
hazle eyes excepted , two years more might make her all that he wished .
as they were turning into the grounds , mr perry passed by on horseback .
and for a moment or two he had done .
for , while she spoke , it occurred to her that he might have called at mrs goddard’s in his way .
this is a new resolution .
mr woodhouse at last was off ;
the language , though plain , was strong and unaffected , and the sentiments it conveyed very much to the credit of the writer .
i saw a vast deal of that in the neighbourhood round maple grove .
in general their evenings were less engaged with friends than their mornings ;
i should have made a good likeness of her , if she would have sat longer , but she was in such a hurry to have me draw her four children that she would not be quiet .
“ it is as well , perhaps , that i have not had the possibility .
he seems perfectly unprepared for that .
my emma , does not every thing serve to prove more and more the beauty of truth and sincerity in all our dealings with each other ?
but i must go and see my father immediately .
she could not respect his eye , but his love and his complaisance were unexceptionable .
i found he was coming up towards me too slowly you know , and as if he did not quite know what to do ;
they talked at first only of the performance .
his perception of the striking improvement of harriet’s manner , since her introduction at hartfield , was not one of the least agreeable proofs of his growing attachment .
i am sure mr elton will lose no time in calling on him ;
another view of man , my second brings ;
you are very obliging to say such things but certainly not .
“ the best fruit in england every body’s favourite always wholesome .
bless me !
yes , i am sure you are much too reasonable .
and if mr knightley really wished to marry , you would not have him refrain on henry’s account , a boy of six years old , who knows nothing of the matter ?
he will be able to tell her how we all are .
the power of observation would be soon given frightfully soon it appeared when her thoughts were in one course .
but it was fully sufficient for mrs elton , who only wanted to be talking herself .
they are very , very kind in their visits .
but what a connexion had she been preparing for mr knightley or for the churchills or even for mr elton !
and , whether in speech or silence , conniving at the comfortable persuasion of his being obliged to go to randalls every day , or poor mrs weston would be disappointed .
she had a great idea that people who had extensive grounds themselves cared very little for the extensive grounds of any body else ;
he was afraid poor isabella would not like it .
if a separation of two months should not have cooled him , there were dangers and evils before her :
“ why , pretty well ;
the rest i leave to you .
cole does not want to be wiser or wittier than his neighbours .
oh !
i am amazed that you should think of such a thing .
“ i thank you ;
“ then she is a greater simpleton than i ever believed her .
he could now , without the drawback of a single unpleasant surmise , without a glance forward at any possible treachery in his guest , give way to all his natural kind-hearted civility in solicitous inquiries after mr frank churchill’s accommodation on his journey , through the sad evils of sleeping two nights on the road , and express very genuine unmixed anxiety to know that he had certainly escaped catching cold which , however , he could not allow him to feel quite assured of himself till after another night .
till this morning , we have not once met since the day of reconciliation .
.
but a visitor immediately afterwards walked in and made it unnecessary .
he looked quick and sensible .
there i was quite right .
now do not you feel that you had ?
as ready to talk and laugh as ever , and seemed delighted to speak of his former visit , and recur to old stories :
and the interesting employment had followed , of reckoning up exactly who there would be , and portioning out the indispensable division of space to every couple .
it has been so many years my province to give advice , that you cannot be surprized , mr knightley , at this little remains of office .
the rich brother-in-law near bristol was the pride of the alliance , and his place and his carriages were the pride of him .
i knew the name , the place , i knew all about it , and instantly saw what she had been doing .
emma then felt it indispensable to wish him a good night .
emma knew what was coming ;
” he heard frank churchill next say , with a glance towards jane , “ i will give it to her shall i ?
i have a great opinion of her .
“ that’s right , my dear , very right .
“ good god !
i think you play quite as well as she does .
tiresome wretches !
to be sure , the charade , with its “ ready wit ” but then the “ soft eyes ” in fact it suited neither ;
“ was not it astonishingly like ?
we must not allow them to be verified in sweet jane fairfax .
but upon my honour , there seems no limits to the licentiousness of that woman’s tongue !
“ thank you .
lord of the earth and sea , he bends a slave , and woman , lovely woman , reigns alone .
emma could look perfectly unconscious and innocent , and answer in a manner that appropriated nothing .
till the time draws nearer , i do not wish to be giving any body trouble .
the conviction seemed real ;
she was obliged , in spite of her previous determination to the contrary , to do it all the justice that mrs weston foretold .
you are very kind to bring me these interesting particulars .
“ i am almost certain that the meeting at the crown is not till to-morrow .
yes , you see , you understand my feelings and will return them if you can .
“ every day more precious and more delightful than the day before !
this was not submitted to by either lady .
stop , stop , let us stand a little back , mrs elton is going ;
“ and then , he saved her life .
and so she began inquiring after her directly , saying , i know you cannot have heard from jane lately , because it is not her time for writing ;’ and when i immediately said , but indeed we have , we had a letter this very morning ,’ i do not know that i ever saw any body more surprized .
but you had better go with mrs weston and hear the instrument .
and miss fairfax , it was reasonable to suppose , would soon cease to belong to highbury .
she had had many a hint from mr knightley and some from her own heart , as to her deficiency but none were equal to counteract the persuasion of its being very disagreeable , a waste of time tiresome women and all the horror of being in danger of falling in with the second-rate and third-rate of highbury , who were calling on them for ever , and therefore she seldom went near them .
“ a very pretty trick you have been playing me , upon my word !
jane was forced to smile completely , for a moment ;
the acquaintance at present had no charm for her .
he is the very best young man but , my dear jane , if you remember , i told you yesterday he was precisely the height of mr perry .
“ he knew nothing about it , emma .
that she was every thing herself ;
as for me , my judgment is worth nothing .
wax-candles in the schoolroom !
she feared it was what every body else must think of and predict .
harriet must feel it and all that she could hope was , by giving the first information herself , to save her from hearing it abruptly from others .
it was a style of beauty , of which elegance was the reigning character , and as such , she must , in honour , by all her principles , admire it :
and upon my word , i have scarcely ever had a bad morning before .
“ it appears to me a plan that nobody can object to , if mr and mrs weston do not .
where is my father ?
that is my idea of him .
“ ah !
“ you must make my apologies to your friend ;
ashamed of every sensation but the one revealed to her her affection for mr knightley .
what had she to wish for ?
wanted to shew a value for her society , and testify respect and consideration .
that mr and mrs weston did think of it , she was very strongly persuaded ;
from mr dixon , i mean i do not know that she ever heard about it from any body else ;
but , in general , she is very much to the taste of every body , though single and though poor .
“ if a woman can ever be excused for thinking only of herself , it is in a situation like jane fairfax’s .
william coxe oh !
isabella and emma , i think , do write very much alike .
i do admire your patriotism .
why should not they explore to box hill though the sucklings did not come ?
the heat was excessive ;
that at first , by miss bates’s account , jane herself was quite at a loss , quite bewildered to think who could possibly have ordered it but now , they were both perfectly satisfied that it could be from only one quarter ;
and finding himself close to mrs elton , and her attention disengaged , he necessarily began on the subject with her .
i know he would be hurt by my failing in such a mark of respect to him on the present occasion .
mr elton made his appearance .
do you know any family of that name ?
harriet was to sit again the next day ;
that would be the way , i suppose , if i were very bad .
“ you saw her answer !
behold him there , the monarch of the seas !
that he has more invitations than there are days in the week .
she was so eager to have them drawn that i could not refuse ;
emma demurred .
but it was just too late .
it was no more than a wish .
he knows he is wrong , and has nothing rational to urge .
dear , no , never .
these were the disadvantages which threatened alloy to her many enjoyments .
but it had passed as his way , as a mere error of judgment , of knowledge , of taste , as one proof among others that he had not always lived in the best society , that with all the gentleness of his address , true elegance was sometimes wanting ;
and mrs weston no one could doubt that a daughter would be most to her ;
and being now almost facing the house where the bateses lodged , emma recollected his intended visit the day before , and asked him if he had paid it .
we all know the difference between the pronouns he or she and thou , the plainest spoken amongst us ;
on her first arrival she had thought her out of spirits , which appeared perfectly natural , as there was a dentist to be consulted ;
i wonder which she will think the handsomest , henry or john ?
“ you need not be at any pains to reconcile me to the match .
emma was silenced .
she was forced to speak , and to speak cheerfully too .
she could fancy such a man .
that is a great charm .
i spoke ;
how do you all do ?
there was a seriousness in harriet’s manner which prepared her , quite as much as her words , for something more than ordinary .
she might have prevented the indulgence and increase of such sentiments .
you forget how time passes .
you could not have gratified me more than by expressing an interest .
here it comes .
she is living in dread of the visit .
you and i need not be afraid .
he was not in his best spirits , but seemed trying to improve them ;
“ he had just looked into the dining-room , and as he was not wanted there , preferred being out of doors .
emma’s only surprize was that jane fairfax should accept those attentions and tolerate mrs elton as she seemed to do .
that’s all .
it was dreadfully mortifying ;
he stopped at highbury , at the bates’s , i fancy , some time and then came on hither ;
she would be respectable and happy ;
his person much admired in general , though not by her , there being a want of elegance of feature which she could not dispense with :
but that is nothing compared with his entire want of gentility .
it was a good scheme ;
i think seriously of miss smith !
but it burst out again when she thought she had succeeded , and after speaking some time of what the poor must suffer in winter , and receiving no other answer than a very plaintive “ mr elton is so good to the poor !
“ another thing must be taken into consideration too mrs elton does not talk to miss fairfax as she speaks of her .
he never read the romance of the forest , nor the children of the abbey .
but he had gone to a wrong place .
just as your drawings always are , my dear .
the evening before this great event (for it was a very great event that mr woodhouse should dine out , on the 24th of december) had been spent by harriet at hartfield , and she had gone home so much indisposed with a cold , that , but for her own earnest wish of being nursed by mrs goddard , emma could not have allowed her to leave the house .
and , jane , you had better go home directly i would not have you out in a shower !
mr elton then turned back to accompany them .
and every delay makes one more apprehensive of other delays .
it is only by seeing women in their own homes , among their own set , just as they always are , that you can form any just judgment .
and now , when the due visit was paid , on her arrival , after a two years’ interval , she was particularly struck with the very appearance and manners , which for those two whole years she had been depreciating .
but it contained , when separated from all the feebleness and tautology of the narration , a substance to sink her spirit especially with the corroborating circumstances , which her own memory brought in favour of mr knightley’s most improved opinion of harriet .
“ i must not hope to be ever situated as you are , in the midst of every dearest connexion , and therefore i cannot expect that simply growing older should make me indifferent about letters .
she was not thoroughly comfortable herself .
a likeness pleases every body ;
and nobody is afraid of her :
i said to my mother , upon my word , ma’am .’ thank you , my mother is remarkably well .
it was about spruce-beer .
the backgammon-table was placed ;
enscombe is in yorkshire ?
“ how is your niece , miss bates ?
they are all remarkably clever ;
i charge you by all that is sacred , not to attempt concealment .
emma agreed to it , and with a blush of sensibility on harriet’s account , which she could not give any sincere explanation of .
miss bates had just done as patty opened the door ;
” he cried , “ i wish your father might be half as easily convinced as john will be , of our having every right that equal worth can give , to be happy together .
a young woman , if she fall into bad hands , may be teased , and kept at a distance from those she wants to be with ;
emma heard that frank wrote in the highest spirits of this arrangement , and seemed most fully to appreciate the blessing of having two months before him of such near neighbourhood to many dear friends for the house was taken for may and june .
” cried emma , turning her glowing cheeks towards him ;
i hope you do not retract what you then said .
go , and interfere .
“ he is a person i never think of from one month’s end to another , ” said mr knightley , with a degree of vexation , which made emma immediately talk of something else , though she could not comprehend why he should be angry .
they were walking into highbury ;
the coming of her sister’s family was so very near at hand , that first in anticipation , and then in reality , it became henceforth her prime object of interest ;
a glance or two between him and his wife , convinced him that all was as right as this speech proclaimed ;
you like news and i heard an article in my way hither that i think will interest you .
mr weston , i could not have believed it of you !
in such cases my interference was giving you two bad feelings instead of one .
perhaps they began to feel it might have been kinder and wiser to have resisted the temptation of any delay , and spared her from a taste of such enjoyments of ease and leisure as must now be relinquished .
how trifling they make every thing else appear !
but you are miserably behindhand .
they were sneering and negligent .
a crowd in a little room miss woodhouse , you have the art of giving pictures in a few words .
poor little emma !
that jane fairfax and mr frank churchill are to be married , and that they have been privately engaged to one another this long while .
mrs churchill had been recommended to the medical skill of an eminent person there , and had otherwise a fancy for the place .
command yourself enough to say no more , and i will endeavour to forget it .
give it houseroom till colonel campbell comes back .
a family of the name of fairfax .
“ i mentioned no names , you will observe .
but not a syllable of real information could emma procure as to what he truly was .
well , miss woodhouse , is he like what you expected ?
let me live them over again .
and there are the coles , such very good people ;
let me order the carriage .
i think you must know hartfield enough to comprehend that .
you , perhaps , might .
f .
but you know how impossible my father would deem it that james should put-to for such a purpose .
but emma was aware that great must be the difference between a mrs weston , only half a mile from them , and a miss taylor in the house ;
mr and mrs weston and their son , miss bates and her niece , who had accidentally met .
“ you may well class the delight , the honour , and the comfort of such a situation together , ” said jane , “ they are pretty sure to be equal ;
what has it been but a system of hypocrisy and deceit , espionage , and treachery ?
the apples themselves are the very finest sort for baking , beyond a doubt ;
do not you see that , at this instant , the very passage of her own letter , which sent me the report , is passing under her eye that the whole blunder is spread before her that she can attend to nothing else , though pretending to listen to the others ?
one might guess twenty things without guessing exactly the right ;
i hope you find a chair .
emma , alone with her father , had half her attention wanted by him while he lamented that young people would be in such a hurry to marry and to marry strangers too and the other half she could give to her own view of the subject .
“ dreadful !
i remember it was written from weymouth , and dated sept .
ah !
but there was a good deal of wet , damp , cheerless weather ;
you blush , harriet .
but i do not think it is at all a likely thing for him to do .
“ very well .
and one of my servants shall go with you to shew you the way .
“ well , ” said she at last , trying to recover herself ;
not such a house as a man was to be pitied for having .
you have made yourself too clear .
oh !
on the contrary , i think a young man might be very safely recommended to take mr elton as a model .
they were just approaching the house where lived mrs and miss bates .
equality in every point but one and that one , since the purity of her heart is not to be doubted , such as must increase his felicity , for it will be his to bestow the only advantages she wants .
but while so many were devoting him to emma , and emma herself making him over to harriet , mr knightley began to suspect him of some inclination to trifle with jane fairfax .
i have been seeing their intimacy with the greatest pleasure .
she then repeated some warm personal praise which she had drawn from mr elton , and now did full justice to ;
“ oh !
but now it is of no consequence .
even this conquest would appear valuable in her eyes .
she certainly had not been in the wrong , and he would never own that he had .
yes but how they were conveyed hither ?
mr frank churchill hardly knows what to say when you speak of miss fairfax’s situation in life .
miss bates , deceived by the mock ceremony of her manner , did not immediately catch her meaning ;
his own attentions , his father’s hints , his mother-in-law’s guarded silence ;
we were very wrong before ;
lively as he was , it seemed a liveliness that did not satisfy himself ;
and in a tone of such sincere , decided , intelligible tenderness as was tolerably convincing .
“ we want only two more to be just the right number .
“ quite wrong , my dear aunt ;
“ that is very likely .
i mean good mr perry !
i could never , i confess , from your manners , assure myself as to the degree of what you felt i could only be certain that there was a preference and a preference which i never believed him to deserve .
and , which was still more lucky , she wanted exactly the advice they gave .
and we shall both have great pleasure in seeing him at the vicarage .
much of this , i have no doubt , she may thank you for .
her face was averted from those who had made the attack , and turned towards her aunt .
but no preparations could be ventured on , and it was all melancholy stagnation .
the regular and best families emma could hardly suppose they would presume to invite neither donwell , nor hartfield , nor randalls .
“ only think of our happening to meet him !
her mind was in a state of flutter and wonder , which made it impossible for her to be collected .
shark is only one syllable .
as a daughter , she hoped she was not without a heart .
emma was obliged to fancy what she liked but she could never believe that in the same situation she should not have discovered the truth .
but his coming would probably prolong rather than break up the party .
i can easily believe that letters are very little to you , much less than to me , but it is not your being ten years older than myself which makes the difference , it is not age , but situation .
she listened , and found it well worth listening to .
“ i thought you meant to go with me .
ease , but not elegance .
“ and i am changed also ;
and therefore why should you be so anxious to pay your respects to a bride ?
it was a very great relief to emma to find harriet as desirous as herself to avoid a meeting .
she must be collected and calm .
as to his going , it was inevitable .
i was rather disappointed that i did not hear from her again speedily ;
his wedding-day was named .
i do not look upon myself as either prosperous or indulged .
did not think him at all in love not in the least .
i saw she had execution , but i did not know she had any taste .
her situation was altogether the subject of hours of gratitude to mrs weston , and of moments only of regret ;
i can think of but one thing who is in love with her ?
how she could dare to fancy herself the chosen of such a man till actually assured of it !
i shall speak to mr e .
i am quite glad to see you .
you left nothing undone .
mrs elton was very much disappointed .
his tender compassion towards oppressed worth can go no farther .
her heart had been long growing kinder towards jane ;
“ to meet in a charitable scheme ;
“ i am ready , if the others are .
open , straightforward , and very well judging .
or , perhaps , he might come in while she were paying her visit .
he gave her a letter , it was from frank , and to herself ;
there must be ample room in it for every real comfort .
emma listened , and looked , and soon perceived that frank churchill’s state might be best defined by the expressive phrase of being out of humour .
i am sorry mr and mrs cole should have done it .
and now , miss woodhouse , i do not think i shall mind seeing them again .
she had not been prepared to have jane fairfax succeed mr elton ;
mr knightley and harriet had arrived during her absence , and were sitting with her father .
happy creature !
but i know no more what i said i was in such a tremble !
mrs weston sees no objection to it , provided you are satisfied .
was not she the whole day with you ?
let me hear from you without delay ;
i am sure i never suspected it , you did it so naturally .
once , i felt the fire rather too much ;
” cried mr knightley .
her objections to mr knightley’s marrying did not in the least subside .
“ nonsense !
“ between mr frank churchill and miss fairfax ?
we are in great hopes that miss woodhouse may be prevailed with to try it this evening .
too much indebted to the event for his acquittal .
” and from her great , her more than commonly thankful delight towards mrs elton for being there , emma guessed that there had been a little show of resentment towards jane , from the vicarage quarter , which was now graciously overcome .
but mrs elton hardly waited for the affirmative before she went on .
but her pride is arrogance and insolence !
it was a concern which brought just employment enough .
mr knightley , is not she ?
a water party ;
i hope we shall have her here next week .
but then there is not so clever a man any where .
“ so prettily done !
mrs elton then said , “ nobody can think less of dress in general than i do but upon such an occasion as this , when every body’s eyes are so much upon me , and in compliment to the westons who i have no doubt are giving this ball chiefly to do me honour i would not wish to be inferior to others .
i do not know her , even by sight .
this was so very well understood between them , that emma could not but feel some surprise , and a little displeasure , on hearing from mr weston that he had been proposing to mrs elton , as her brother and sister had failed her , that the two parties should unite , and go together ;
harriet had business at ford’s .
emma saw its artifice , and returned to her first surmises .
i must speak to him if possible , just to thank him .
and they were still discussing the point , when mr knightley , who had left the room immediately after his brother’s first report of the snow , came back again , and told them that he had been out of doors to examine , and could answer for there not being the smallest difficulty in their getting home , whenever they liked it , either now or an hour hence .
i shall always congratulate myself that you were not of the box hill party .
she could really almost fancy herself at maple grove .
it was a melancholy change ;
and at last , as if resolved to qualify his opinion completely for travelling round to its object , he wound it all up with astonishment at the youth and beauty of her person .
i almost long to attempt her likeness myself .
“ and always did .
i am rather a talker ;
“ mrs bates we passed her house i saw miss bates at the window .
and till mr elton himself appeared , she had been much occupied by it , continually pondering over what could be done in return , and wishing to do more than she dared to confess .
his friends are eager to promote his happiness .
, but heat was intolerable and he sat down , at the greatest possible distance from the slight remains of mr woodhouse’s fire , looking very deplorable .
you are doing just what you ought .
and jane fairfax , though no great favourite with her in general , she was at that moment very happy to assist in praising .
adopt her , educate her .
“ oh !
“ but you do not mean to deny that there was a time and not very distant either when you gave me reason to understand that you did care about him ?
within half an hour it was known all over highbury .
and i hope it will not be long before he does .
and will not colonel and mrs campbell be sorry to find that she has engaged herself before their return ?
what is right to be done cannot be done too soon .
“ no , not at randalls ;
a circumstance rather unlucky occurred .
the whole party were but just reassembled in the drawing-room when mr weston made his appearance among them .
the sphere in which she moves is much above his .
time passed on .
former provocations reappeared .
she read the concluding lines , and was all flutter and happiness .
“ my picture !
and we are a very quiet set of people , i believe ;
mr woodhouse was almost as glad to see him now , as he would have been sorry to see him before .
her heart beat quick on hearing harriet’s footstep and voice ;
in this age of literature , such collections on a very grand scale are not uncommon .
“ it will not do , ” whispered frank to emma ;
the visit afforded her many pleasant recollections the next day ;
could not have imagined it .
such an immense plantation all round it !
i am not prejudiced .
“ how i could so long a time be fancying myself !
indeed , miss woodhouse , (speaking more collectedly ,) with the consciousness which i have of misconduct , very great misconduct , it is particularly consoling to me to know that those of my friends , whose good opinion is most worth preserving , are not disgusted to such a degree as to i have not time for half that i could wish to say .
and certainly did not speak in vain .
she could only give him a look ;
miss bates came to the carriage door , all gratitude , and agreeing with her most earnestly in thinking an airing might be of the greatest service and every thing that message could do was tried but all in vain .
and , to my utter astonishment , i found , when he (finding me nowhere else) joined me there at last , that i had been actually sitting with them very nearly three-quarters of an hour .
emma wondered whether the same suspicion of what might be expected from their knowing each other , which had taken strong possession of her mind , had ever crossed his ;
“ but it is too far , indeed it is , to be walking quite alone .
“ my dear madam !
some news .
and is he to be rewarded with that sweet young woman ?
“ nothing can be actually settled yet , perhaps , ” replied emma , smiling “ but , excuse me , it must be thought of .
and , my dear , whenever he comes , you had better let him look at little bella’s throat .
he talked of harriet , and praised her so warmly , that she could not suppose any thing wanting which a little time would not add .
i was always glad he did not come at christmas ;
mr knightley had spoken prophetically , when he once said , “ emma , you have been no friend to harriet smith .
none of this dreadful sequel would have been .
and he was soon used to be talked to by each , on every fair occasion .
but it would not do ;
mrs weston was alone in the drawing-room :
is there nobody you would not rather ?
“ or that he did not give her the use of their own instrument which must now be shut up in london , untouched by any body .
i thought it must be so .
emma could not resist .
perry shall have all the credit .
oh !
i assure you , it did the children a great deal of good .
it will give you every thing that you want consideration , independence , a proper home it will fix you in the centre of all your real friends , close to hartfield and to me , and confirm our intimacy for ever .
i come in for a pretty good share as a second .
going in dismal weather , to return probably in worse ;
as to the pretence of trying her native air , i look upon that as a mere excuse .
and as for harriet , i will venture to say that she cannot gain by the acquaintance .
“ aye , very true .
“ aye , very true , my dear , ” cried the latter , though jane had not spoken a word “ i was just going to say the same thing .
mr elton was all obligation and cheerfulness ;
she could see nothing but evil in it .
be infinitely cleverer and not half so conceited .
some faults of temper john knightley had ;
my behaviour , during the very happy fortnight which i spent with you , did not , i hope , lay me open to reprehension , excepting on one point .
she had such a regard for mr knightley , as to think he deserved even her dearest emma ;
the appearance of the servants looking out for them to give notice of the carriages was a joyful sight ;
“ did you ever sit for your picture ?
emma sat with her as long as she could , to attend her in mrs goddard’s unavoidable absences , and raise her spirits by representing how much mr elton’s would be depressed when he knew her state ;
every thing that i have said or done , for many weeks past , has been with the sole view of marking my adoration of yourself .
but hush , hush !
“ oh !
and on examining watches , so much of the morning was perceived to be gone , that mrs weston and her companion taking leave also , could allow themselves only to walk with the two young ladies to hartfield gates , before they set off for randalls .
it was horrible to emma to think how it must sink him in the general opinion , to foresee the smiles , the sneers , the merriment it would prompt at his expense ;
but the intercourse of the last seven years , the equal footing and perfect unreserve which had soon followed isabella’s marriage , on their being left to each other , was yet a dearer , tenderer recollection .
do not forget your engagement .
“ my dear papa , he is three-and-twenty .
it ought to be no recommendation to you .
but i must , i will , i will tell you truths while i can ;
” “ she has taken it into her head that enscombe is too cold for her .
but , on the other hand , they were of low origin , in trade , and only moderately genteel .
she felt herself a most fortunate woman ;
i am sure she is very good i hope she will be very happy .
it is a sign i was not there to take care of you .
and so it ought .
do let me know directly what it is .
i believe few married women are half as much mistress of their husband’s house as i am of hartfield ;
fortunate that your affections were not farther entangled !
“ well , ” said emma , “ i suppose we shall gradually grow reconciled to the idea , and i wish them very happy .
and if one is to travel , there is not much to chuse between forty miles and an hundred .
nobody talked about it .
he really is engaged from morning to night .
but hardly had she so spoken , when she found her brother was civilly offering a seat in his carriage , if the weather were mr elton’s only objection , and mr elton actually accepting the offer with much prompt satisfaction .
and the remembrance of the less just and less gentle sensations of the past , obliged her to admit that jane might very naturally resolve on seeing mrs cole or any other steady friend , when she might not bear to see herself .
it was a life of deceit !
but in the general amount of the day there was deficiency .
mr knightley could not be there too often ;
” was her immediate exclamation .
frank churchill’s character was not desperate .
they might be more safely held up as a pattern .
they will sometimes obtrude but how you can court them !
“ i rather doubt that .
oh !
may is the very month which mrs churchill is ordered , or has ordered herself , to spend in some warmer place than enscombe in short , to spend in london ;
what nonsense one talks , miss woodhouse , when hard at work , if one talks at all ;
indeed , indeed , we must begin inquiring directly .
“ i am very glad , indeed , my dear , to hear she is to be so comfortably settled .
if i come , i shall be cross .
she will grow just refined enough to be uncomfortable with those among whom birth and circumstances have placed her home .
“ i was just going to tell you of our agreeable surprize in seeing him arrive this morning .
he had never been in the room at the crown in his life did not know the people who kept it by sight .
and her satisfaction her more than satisfaction her cheerful enjoyment , was so just and so apparent , that emma , well as she knew her father , was sometimes taken by surprize at his being still able to pity poor miss taylor ,’ when they left her at randalls in the centre of every domestic comfort , or saw her go away in the evening attended by her pleasant husband to a carriage of her own .
even emma grew tired at last of flattery and merriment , and wished herself rather walking quietly about with any of the others , or sitting almost alone , and quite unattended to , in tranquil observation of the beautiful views beneath her .
i have heard her every year of our lives since we both began .
he might even have harriet in his thoughts at the moment ;
“ come , ” said he , “ you are anxious for a compliment , so i will tell you that you have improved her .
and you agreed to it , expressing yourself very warmly as to your sense of that service , and mentioning even what your sensations had been in seeing him come forward to your rescue .
“ of all horrid things , leave-taking is the worst .
.
but does not the lapse of one-and-twenty years bring our understandings a good deal nearer ?
that a man who might have spent his evening quietly at home after a day of business in london , should set off again , and walk half a mile to another man’s house , for the sake of being in mixed company till bed-time , of finishing his day in the efforts of civility and the noise of numbers , was a circumstance to strike him deeply .
“ oh !
she talked with a great deal of reason , and at least equal affection but she had too much to urge for emma’s attention ;
mr martin is now awkward and abrupt ;
“ well , miss woodhouse , (with a gentle sigh ,) what do you think of her ?
her fancy was very active .
but if you want to shew him any attention , my dear , ask him to come and dine with us some day .
and where they were good , the effect was fortunately he need not attempt to describe what the effect was .
a few inferior dwellings were first to be passed , and then , about a quarter of a mile down the lane rose the vicarage , an old and not very good house , almost as close to the road as it could be .
half a minute brought it all out .
“ he has been wanting to come to us , ” continued mr weston , “ ever since september :
i am sure she saw me , but she looked away directly , and took no notice ;
harriet looked grave .
(shaking his head) the uncertainty of when i may be able to return !
i am tired of doing nothing .
she was pleased , on taking leave , to find miss fairfax determined to attend her out of the room , to go with her even downstairs ;
but it was most prudent to avoid speech .
“ she will not be surprized , papa , at least .
she was sensible that you had never received any proper acknowledgment from herself .
emma allowed her father to talk but supplied her visitors in a much more satisfactory style , and on the present evening had particular pleasure in sending them away happy .
when had he succeeded to that place in her affection , which frank churchill had once , for a short period , occupied ?
ten minutes would have been all that was necessary , perhaps all that was proper ;
you got hannah that good place .
one perplexity , however , arose , which the gentlemen did not disdain .
it is not swisserland , but it will be something for a young man so much in want of a change .
who so cheerful , so attentive , so attached to him ?
miss smith !
and from the best , the purest of motives , might now be denying herself this visit to ireland , and resolving to divide herself effectually from him and his connexions by soon beginning her career of laborious duty .
she was obliged to break off from these very pleasant observations , which were otherwise of a sort to run into great length , by the eagerness of harriet’s wondering questions .
sixteen miles nay , eighteen it must be full eighteen to manchester-street was a serious obstacle .
the move began ;
they had sung together once or twice , it appeared , at weymouth .
it seemed as if he could not think so ill of any two persons’ understanding as to suppose they meant to marry till it were proved against them .
“ my dear miss woodhouse , a vast deal may be done by those who dare to act .
he was not guided by her feelings in reprobating the ball , for she enjoyed the thought of it to an extraordinary degree .
“ we should not like her so well as we do , sir , if we could suppose it ;
“ miss woodhouse , as you will not give me your opinion , i must do as well as i can by myself ;
it is the very last thing i would stand the brunt of just now .
” seemed to burst from an overcharged heart , and to describe somewhat of the continual endurance to be practised by her , even towards some of those who loved her best .
but i think , my dear , you said you had got it .
one man’s style must not be the rule of another’s .
i thought you had lost half your property , at least .
circumstances that might swell to half an hour’s relation , and contained multiplied proofs to her who had seen them , had passed undiscerned by her who now heard them ;
i protest against having paid the smallest attention to any one else .
he said so expressly .
you will join us .
we have been sitting with your father glad to see him so well .
and though there was something in it which her own heart could not approve something of ingratitude , merely glossed over it must be done , or what would become of harriet ?
and , she really believed , would scarcely try to conceal any thing relative to the churchills from her , excepting those views on the young man , of which her own imagination had already given her such instinctive knowledge .
especially to one , who , like mr knightley , had seen so much to blame in his conduct .
there had been no real affection either in his language or manners .
that was your name for him , was it ?
“ i have the greatest pleasure , my dear emma , in forwarding to you the enclosed .
“ my mother is so pleased !
“ ah !
i am sure i had much rather hear you .
oh !
and here ended the difficulties of decision .
but emma suspected she might have been glad to change feelings with harriet , very glad to have purchased the mortification of having loved yes , of having loved even mr elton in vain by the surrender of all the dangerous pleasure of knowing herself beloved by the husband of her friend .
we shall not be many , you know .
this will certainly be the beginning of one of our quarrels about emma , mr knightley .
some people even talked of a promise to his wife on her deathbed , and others of the son and the uncle not letting him .
in the meanwhile the lame horse recovered so fast , that the party to box hill was again under happy consideration ;
and till she should have completely recovered her usual strength , they must forbid her engaging in duties , which , so far from being compatible with a weakened frame and varying spirits , seemed , under the most favourable circumstances , to require something more than human perfection of body and mind to be discharged with tolerable comfort .
oh !
she is walking about the room .
not that emma was gay and thoughtless from any real felicity ;
all the minor arrangements of table and chair , lights and music , tea and supper , made themselves ;
and i am sure she will make a very good servant :
do you think i am right ?
i forget where we had been walking to very likely to randalls ;
i deserve to be under a continual blush all the rest of my life .
the churchills might not have a word to say in return ;
emma would be “ very happy to wait on mrs bates , &c .
she remembered what mr knightley had once said to her about mr elton , the caution he had given , the conviction he had professed that mr elton would never marry indiscreetly ;
but he cannot command his own time .
” she did not suspect him .
mr knightley !
immediately they crossed the road and came forward to her ;
this , on his side , might merely proceed from her not being thought of ;
i made the match , you know , four years ago ;
but it is right to spare our horses when we can .
“ well , go on .
i am serious , miss woodhouse , whatever your penetrating eyes may fancy i am sick of england and would leave it to-morrow , if i could .
“ yes , they are about one hundred and ninety miles from london , a considerable journey .
if i had but her memory !
but one is apt to speak only of those who lead .
and for their own comfort they would have retained her wholly ;
“ i do not think it is so very small .
she really does you credit .
it will be safer to say no ,’ perhaps .
emma felt that her own note had deserved something better ;
this is precisely what i wanted .
and so excellent in the church !
they are silly things , and break up one’s family circle grievously .
considering how very handsome she is , she appears to be little occupied with it ;
it is not in the smallest degree connected with any human being of the name of knightley .
she has been so kind as to promise it .
my dear sir , as my mother says , our friends are only too good to us .
i am quite determined to refuse him .
she should see them henceforward with the closest observance ;
fortunately , however , it did cease .
god knows , i have been a very indifferent lover .
his horror of late hours , and large dinner-parties , made him unfit for any acquaintance but such as would visit him on his own terms .
isabella sent quite as good an account of her visitor as could be expected ;
oh !
of mr elton .
“ i suppose you have heard of the handsome letter mr frank churchill has written to mrs weston ?
i suppose there is not a man in such practice anywhere .
and by the time the second carriage was in motion , a few flakes of snow were finding their way down , and the sky had the appearance of being so overcharged as to want only a milder air to produce a very white world in a very short time .
which interfered with all their wishes of giving emma that distinction .
that you have never thought seriously of her ?
” “ miss smith !
nobody could have helped it .
but she was glad to see it .
we will be cautious now .
but emma’s wonder lessened soon afterwards , on seeing mr elton sauntering about .
i was so miserable !
to be a second time the dupe of her misconceptions and flattery .
ah !
poor fellow !
her own attachment had really subsided into a mere nothing ;
you must grant me that .
“ i perfectly remember it .
and never , never could i expect to be so truly beloved and important ;
marriage , in fact , would not do for her .
i think very well of mr elton , and this is the only way i have of doing him a service .
“ me !
it is no difficulty to see who you take after !
the quiet , heart-felt satisfaction of the old lady , and the rapturous delight of her daughter who proved even too joyous to talk as usual , had been a gratifying , yet almost an affecting , scene .
not so openly as he might have done had her father been out of the room , but speaking plain enough to be very intelligible to emma .
walk home !
and they were both insufferable .
you see we have been wedging one leg with paper .
i do not want to say more than is necessary i am too much ashamed of having given way as i have done , and i dare say you understand me .
and another , to write verses and charades like this .
she should then have heard more :
but who she was , might be found out ;
and , from a few other half-syllables very much suspected that he was announcing an early visit from his son ;
my first displays the wealth and pomp of kings , lords of the earth !
i am in a fine flow of spirits , an’t i ?
so always first and always right in any man’s eyes as i am in my father’s .
she was still looking at him with the most speaking amazement .
oh , said i , my dear , i did say as much as i could .
the thing is determined , that is (laughing affectedly) as far as i can presume to determine any thing without the concurrence of my lord and master .
so silly so satisfied so smiling so prosing so undistinguishing and unfastidious and so apt to tell every thing relative to every body about me , i would marry to-morrow .
so that we have the agreeable prospect of frequent visits from frank the whole spring precisely the season of the year which one should have chosen for it :
miss woodhouse looks as if she did not want me .
28th and began , my dear madam ,’ but i forget how it went on ;
” “ he was generally thought so .
i am glad he can afford it .
there is great fear , great caution , great resolution somewhere .
but as he has made up his mind , and does not seem to feel the cold himself , i do not like to interfere , as i know it would be so great a disappointment to mr and mrs weston .
you must be the best judge of your own happiness .
she thought nothing of his attachment , and was insulted by his hopes .
she was not struck by any thing remarkably clever in miss smith’s conversation , but she found her altogether very engaging not inconveniently shy , not unwilling to talk and yet so far from pushing , shewing so proper and becoming a deference , seeming so pleasantly grateful for being admitted to hartfield , and so artlessly impressed by the appearance of every thing in so superior a style to what she had been used to , that she must have good sense , and deserve encouragement .
harriet was too intent on the lines to hear .
especially as something was going on amongst the others , in the most overpowering period of mr elton’s nonsense , which she particularly wished to listen to .
emma was very decided in thinking such an attachment no bad thing for her friend .
she was very often thinking of him , and quite impatient for a letter , that she might know how he was , how were his spirits , how was his aunt , and what was the chance of his coming to randalls again this spring .
but still the cake was eaten ;
three months , she says so , positively , as i am going to have the pleasure of reading to you .
it was not to oblige jane fairfax therefore that he would have preferred the society of william larkins .
but hardly any degree of personal compliment could have made her regardless of that greatest fault of all in her eyes which he sometimes fell into , the want of respectful forbearance towards her father .
and of fancying what the observations of all those might be , who were now seeing them together for the first time .
“ no ;
“ i am afraid i am sometimes very fanciful and troublesome .
you and miss fairfax gave us some very good music .
she shall not do such a thing again , ” eagerly rejoined mrs elton .
mrs weston begs you to put on your tippet .
this to me !
i thought her , on a thousand occasions , unnecessarily scrupulous and cautious :
it is impossible .
no , i am perfectly sure that he is not trifling or silly .
respect would be added to affection .
with tuesday came the agreeable prospect of seeing him again , and for a longer time than hitherto ;
you have many parties of that kind here , i suppose , miss woodhouse , every summer ?
did not keep the horses a moment .
i could not walk half so far .
not more than five couple could be mustered ;
“ he writes like a sensible man , ” replied emma , when she had read the letter .
” and as clearly heard emma opposing it with eager laughing warmth .
his admiration was certainly very warm ;
but poor harriet could not follow .
one says those sort of things , of course , without any idea of a serious meaning .
“ miss smith !
but still i cannot imagine she would not be persuaded .
humph harriet’s ready wit !
they must keep as much together as they could ;
they all seemed to remember the day , the hour , the party , the occasion to feel the same consciousness , the same regrets to be ready to return to the same good understanding ;
and of her having an upper maid who had lived five-and-twenty years with her ;
i felt how right you were the whole time , but was too anxious for securing any thing to like to yield .
she was , besides , which was the worst of all , so cold , so cautious !
my acquaintance is so very extensive , that i have little doubt of hearing of something to suit her shortly .
but i assure you there was very little for me or for any body to do .
i hope he will not mind it so very much .
how to understand it all !
“ perhaps i intended you to say so , but i meant self-command .
i should not like a man who is so soon discomposed by a hot morning .
“ you will make my excuses , my dear , as civilly as possible .
“ i either depend more upon emma’s good sense than you do , or am more anxious for her present comfort ;
and all the youth and servants in the place were soon in the happiness of frightful news .
to hartfield of course .
often as she had wished for and ordered it , she had never been able to get any thing tolerable .
with such a woman he has a chance .
he appeared to have a very open temper certainly a very cheerful and lively one ;
two such could never be granted .
but when she got to maple grove , he could recollect that there were ladies just arriving to be attended to , and with happy smiles must hurry away .
one of those points on which his influence failed , he then mentioned .
and afterwards , but little .
it was a delightful visit ;
“ i should not have thought it possible , ” she began , “ that you could have misunderstood me !
“ i have escaped ;
mrs churchill was unwell far too unwell to do without him ;
of pride , indeed , there was , perhaps , scarcely enough ;
had she refused , i should have gone mad .
they ought to have balls there at least every fortnight through the winter .
but it is done ;
our coachman and horses are so extremely expeditious !
an easy , guidable man , to be persuaded into any thing by his nephew .
but she had made up her mind how to meet this presumption so many weeks before it appeared , that when the insult came at last , it found her very differently affected .
“ yes , you were very cross ;
robert martin would never have proceeded so far , if he had not felt persuaded of her not being disinclined to him .
and , after a moment’s pause , mrs elton chose another subject .
“ very well , ” replied emma ;
“ i will say no more about him , ” cried emma , “ you turn every thing to evil .
a manner of kindness and sweetness !
i must put on a few ornaments now , because it is expected of me .
i should not wonder if it were to bring on the declaration .
mr knightley to be no longer coming there for his evening comfort !
jane’s solicitude about fetching her own letters had not escaped emma .
poor girl !
“ indeed you injure me if you suppose me unconvinced .
i shall be at home in twenty minutes .
in short , the full direction to mr smallridge’s , near bristol , stared me in the face .
oh ,’ said he , wait half a minute , till i have finished my job ;’ for , would you believe it , miss woodhouse , there he is , in the most obliging manner in the world , fastening in the rivet of my mother’s spectacles .
mrs john knightley was delighted to be of use ;
i have some notion of putting such a trimming as this to my white and silver poplin .
things did not seem that is , there seemed a little cloud upon the spirits of some .
oh no !
now for it .
here are seven of you , besides myself , (who , she is pleased to say , am very entertaining already ,) and she only demands from each of you either one thing very clever , be it prose or verse , original or repeated or two things moderately clever or three things very dull indeed , and she engages to laugh heartily at them all .
it was quite a chance , he said , that he had not gone round by randalls .
he might not be aware of the inroads on domestic peace to be occasioned by no housekeeper’s room , or a bad butler’s pantry , but no doubt he did perfectly feel that enscombe could not make him happy , and that whenever he were attached , he would willingly give up much of wealth to be allowed an early establishment .
perhaps there was want of spirit in the pretence of it ;
let us forgive each other at once .
it must have been from attachment only , that she could be led to form the engagement .
i did it because i thought it would offend you ;
you think so , do not you ?
but though i was always doing wrong things , they were very bad wrong things , and such as did me no service .
he had still a small house in highbury , where most of his leisure days were spent ;
the sigh which accompanied it was really estimable ;
“ his father’s marriage , ” he said , “ had been the wisest measure , every friend must rejoice in it ;
let my accents swell to mickleham on one side , and dorking on the other .
do not let us be too solemn on the business .
better be without sense , than misapply it as you do .
her pardon was duly begged at the close of the song , and every thing usual followed .
emma got up on the morrow more disposed for comfort than she had gone to bed , more ready to see alleviations of the evil before her , and to depend on getting tolerably out of it .
we talked it all over with mr weston last night .
his civilities to the other ladies must be paid ;
i would be understood to mean , that it can be only weak , irresolute characters , (whose happiness must be always at the mercy of chance ,) who will suffer an unfortunate acquaintance to be an inconvenience , an oppression for ever .
they are but too apt to give up music .
he was gone ;
oh !
he has the tenderest spirit of gallantry towards us all !
there was no being displeased with such an encourager , for his admiration made him discern a likeness almost before it was possible .
he owed it to her , to risk any thing that might be involved in an unwelcome interference , rather than her welfare ;
“ you have not deserved this .
“ oh yes !
one cannot have too large a party .
i remember her telling me at the ball , that i owed mrs elton gratitude for her attentions to miss fairfax .
he is only going to the crown , quite on the other side of the street , and there are a great many houses ;
you would not have little henry cut out from donwell ?
mr john knightley here asked emma quietly whether there were any doubts of the air of randalls .
after much thinking , she could determine on nothing better , than harriet’s returning the visit ;
i never had much opinion of the sea air .
“ i am glad you think so ;
so much of every body , and so little of themselves , that every kindly feeling was at work for them .
no , no , henry must have donwell .
but hardly had they been told of the baby , and mr woodhouse received the thanks for coming , which he asked for , when a glimpse was caught through the blind , of two figures passing near the window .
the difference which randalls , randalls alone makes in your goings-on , is very great .
“ i am disappointed , ” was his only answer .
and with so much to be said for him altogether , she found she must not judge him harshly .
she could only resolve at last , that she would still avoid a meeting with her , and communicate all that need be told by letter ;
there is an anxiety , a curiosity in what one feels for emma .
from harriet’s happening not to be at hartfield , and her father’s being present to engage mr elton , she had a quarter of an hour of the lady’s conversation to herself , and could composedly attend to her ;
another slice of cold meat , another draught of madeira and water , will make you nearly on a par with the rest of us .
but never did she go without mr woodhouse’s giving a gentle sigh , and saying , “ ah , poor miss taylor !
she was so busy in admiring those soft blue eyes , in talking and listening , and forming all these schemes in the in-betweens , that the evening flew away at a very unusual rate ;
i am determined against all interference .
her health seemed for the moment completely deranged appetite quite gone and though there were no absolutely alarming symptoms , nothing touching the pulmonary complaint , which was the standing apprehension of the family , mr perry was uneasy about her .
but now i seem to feel that i may deserve him ;
“ i was not quite impartial in my judgment , emma :
and after a pretty long speech from miss bates , which few persons listened to , she also found it possible to accept dear miss woodhouse’s most obliging invitation .
i have engaged mrs weston to correspond with me .
what do you deserve ?
for the moment , he was silent ;
but still they must feel that any body’s hurrying away is no great compliment ;
mr elton was sitting here , i remember , much about where i am now .
you wrote her answer too .
he was wishing to get the better of his attachment to herself , she just recovering from her mania for mr elton .
no , i dare say you do not .
“ you are not vain , mr knightley .
a pretty fortune ;
“ depend upon it , emma , a sensible man would find no difficulty in it .
mrs bates , mrs perry , mrs goddard and others , were a good deal behind-hand in knowledge of the world , but she would soon shew them how every thing ought to be arranged .
she calls you , knightley what can she do for mr cole ?
she is always so attentive to them !
this is quite the season indeed for friendly meetings .
emma was not at this time in a state of spirits to care really about mr frank churchill’s not coming , except as a disappointment at randalls .
we do not often look upon fine young men , well-bred and agreeable .
we must go and pay wedding visit very soon .
“ middling , my dear ;
and when there was no other partner in the room .
“ this is the luxury of a large party , ” said she :
“ my being charming , harriet , is not quite enough to induce me to marry ;
and mr woodhouse , always the first object on such occasions , was carefully attended to his own by mr knightley and mr weston ;
he was not exactly what she had expected ;
she says she cannot bear to have the poor old vicarage without a mistress .
how very few of those men in a rank of life to address emma would have renounced their own home for hartfield !
pass us , if you please , mr churchill .
i must go and ask her whether it is an irish fashion .
there was a languor , a want of spirits , a want of union , which could not be got over .
emma turned away her head , divided between tears and smiles .
made her quite sorry to acknowledge that they had transcribed it some pages ago already .
before emma had forfeited her confidence , and about the third time of their meeting , she heard all mrs elton’s knight-errantry on the subject .
it was an alarming change ;
till they do fall in love with well-informed minds instead of handsome faces , a girl , with such loveliness as harriet , has a certainty of being admired and sought after , of having the power of chusing from among many , consequently a claim to be nice .
did you ever hear any thing so strange ?
he was immediately interested .
exactly so .
a very great deduction from her father’s daily comfort and , as to herself , she could not at all endure the idea of jane fairfax at donwell abbey .
why could not they go on as they had done ?
” she cried with a most open eagerness “ never , for the twentieth part of a moment , did such an idea occur to me .
and when they reached the farm , and she was to be put down , at the end of the broad , neat gravel walk , which led between espalier apple-trees to the front door , the sight of every thing which had given her so much pleasure the autumn before , was beginning to revive a little local agitation ;
i had known the campbells a little in town ;
the event had every promise of happiness for her friend .
“ my dear emma , ” said he at last , with earnest kindness , “ do you think you perfectly understand the degree of acquaintance between the gentleman and lady we have been speaking of ?
i am sorry for her .
emma looked at harriet while the point was under consideration ;
and it is not merely the house the grounds , i assure you , as far as i could observe , are strikingly like .
she could not endure the thought !
you will express yourself very properly , i am sure .
i am as confident of seeing frank here before the middle of january , as i am of being here myself :
“ you are extremely kind , ” said jane ;
i doubt whether my own sense would have corrected me without it .
it was kindly said , and very far from giving offence .
i shall sit by you .
my poor mother does not know how to bear it .
do you mean with regard to this letter ?
mrs dixon , i understand , has no remarkable degree of personal beauty ;
but the case is altered now .
and she was made such a fuss with by every body !
indeed i am very sorry .
no !
what strength , or what constancy of affection he might be subject to , was another point ;
is he indeed ?
it must not be :
they are very important and sorry i am that you cannot feel them sufficiently to act upon them .
“ oh !
i could not bear the idea of it ;
how did miss campbell appear to like it ?
she was feeling too much ;
and we used sometimes to say very cutting things !
and i will keep as much awake as i can ;
it is such enjoyment to them , that if their uncle did not lay down the rule of their taking turns , whichever began would never give way to the other .
can i do any thing for you ?
i was convinced there were two , and there is but one .
this was a device , i suppose , to sport with my curiosity , and exercise my talent of guessing .
you would have thrown yourself out of all good society .
but meant , having once talked him handsomely over , to be no farther incommoded by any troublesome topic , and to wander at large amongst all the mistresses and misses of highbury , and their card-parties .
the evening of the very day on which they went brought a note from mr elton to mr woodhouse , a long , civil , ceremonious note , to say , with mr elton’s best compliments , “ that he was proposing to leave highbury the following morning in his way to bath ;
to her taste a great deal better , for frank churchill grew talkative and gay , making her his first object .
emma was most agreeably surprized .
“ i declare i cannot recollect what i was talking of .
he sat by her at dinner .
“ but they would have done better had they given her notice of it .
all this spoken extremely fast obliged miss bates to stop for breath ;
you will have my sketches , some time or other , to look at or my tour to read or my poem .
“ you are ungrateful .
there every little dissatisfaction that had occurred before came to a crisis .
but i hear of none , except what are merely personal ;
the sense of pleasure and the sense of rendering justice , and was determining that she would dislike her no longer .
for i think you have a little cold , and patty has been washing the kitchen .’ oh !
“ my dear harriet , i perfectly remember the substance of what i said on the occasion .
that was the noble benevolence and generosity ;
“ she will think frank ought to ask her .
“ so i remember to have heard .
a reasonable visit paid , mr weston began to move .
her mind was quite sick of mr elton and the martins .
her disposition and abilities were equally worthy of all that friendship could do ;
“ good morning to you , ” said he , rising and walking off abruptly .
“ a very serious sort , i assure you ;
“ i do so wonder , miss woodhouse , that you should not be married , or going to be married !
worse and worse .
mrs weston and miss bates met them at the door .
mrs martin had told her one day (and there was a blush as she said it ,) that it was impossible for any body to be a better son , and therefore she was sure , whenever he married , he would make a good husband .
she had drawn back and declined at first , but , on being pressed had yielded ;
a great deal of very reasonable , very just displeasure i had to persuade away .
“ oh !
“ is not this most vexatious , knightley ?
“ if you were as much guided by nature in your estimate of men and women , and as little under the power of fancy and whim in your dealings with them , as you are where these children are concerned , we might always think alike .
is not it possible , that when enquiring , as you thought , into the state of your affections , he might be alluding to mr martin he might have mr martin’s interest in view ?
he began with great earnestness to entreat her to refrain from visiting the sick-chamber again , for the present to entreat her to promise him not to venture into such hazard till he had seen mr perry and learnt his opinion ;
its probability and its eligibility have really so equalled each other !
and as to smaller-sized rooms than i had been used to , i really could not give it a thought .
and perhaps the mode of it , the mystery , the surprize , is more like a young woman’s scheme than an elderly man’s .
of course , he must be sorry to lose her they must be all sorry .
consider what you are about .
she has a fault .
when it was thus settled on her sister’s side , emma proposed it to her friend , and found her very persuadable .
i always deserve the best treatment , because i never put up with any other ;
i know what a modest creature you are ;
it was all the service she could now render her poor friend ;
poor miss taylor !
“ one should be sorry to see greater pride or refinement in the teacher of a school , harriet .
“ must i go first ?
and i am sure he may be depended on , for he thoroughly understands the nature of the air , and his own brother and family have been there repeatedly .
and harriet would have seemed almost too lucky , if it had not been for the cruel state of things before , and for the very complete enjoyment and very high sense of the distinction which her happy features announced .
on her side , all was warmth , energy , and triumph and she positively refused to take her friend’s negative , though miss fairfax continued to assure her that she would not at present engage in any thing , repeating the same motives which she had been heard to urge before .
he had given it , he could assure her , very long and calm consideration ;
you and i , emma , will venture to take the part of the poor husband .
“ yes rather i have been thinking of it some little time .
i am sure you did not much expect to like us .
and i was fully convinced of his being in love with harriet .
we invalids think we are privileged people .
it saves trouble , and is a something to get me out .
dancing with open windows !
“ you know what you are about .
full of thanks , and full of news , miss bates knew not which to give quickest .
and miss woodhouse’s performances must be capital .
what an air of probability sometimes runs through a dream !
and he sighed and smiled himself off in a way that left the balance of approbation much in his favour .
well , i wish them happy with all my heart .
the want of miss taylor would be felt every hour of every day .
“ but it is nothing of any consequence .
how extremely pleasant .
there does seem to be a something in the air of hartfield which gives love exactly the right direction , and sends it into the very channel where it ought to flow .
william larkins is such an old acquaintance !
i wish hetty had not gone .
“ and when is miss fairfax to leave you ?
and i could take the pattern gown home any day .
“ miss woodhouse has given her friend the only beauty she wanted , ” observed mrs weston to him not in the least suspecting that she was addressing a lover .
my dear ;
“ no , my dear , i never encouraged any body to marry , but i would always wish to pay every proper attention to a lady and a bride , especially , is never to be neglected .
finesse how they pervert the understanding !
do not distress her .
