“ always seems to me , ” said wemmick , “ as if he had set a man-trap and was watching it .
“ you get me a file .
“ now , biddy , ” said i , “ i am very sorry to see this in you .
but i should have gone on with the subject so far as to describe the dinner in gerrard street , if we had not then come into a sudden glare of gas .
a fearful man , all in coarse grey , with a great iron on his leg .
“ everybody should know his own business , ” said mr jaggers .
not that he ever said anything , or did anything , openly importing hostility ;
stepping in for a moment at the open gate , and looking around me with the uncomfortable air of a stranger who had no business there , i saw the auctioneer’s clerk walking on the casks and telling them off for the information of a catalogue-compiler , pen in hand , who made a temporary desk of the wheeled chair i had so often pushed along to the tune of old clem .
but it was by no means so plain to mr provis (i resolved to call him by that name) , who reserved his consent to herbert’s participation until he should have seen him and formed a favourable judgment of his physiognomy .
“ who taught me to be proud ?
and i might not , could not , would not , and should not go home ;
but i could never , never , undo what i had done .
what night is to-night ?
“ you can’t try , handel ?
i had seen none .
chapter xl .
i thought i overheard miss havisham answer , only it seemed so unlikely , “ well ?
“ come nearer ;
they had taken me into the kitchen , and i had laid my head down on the old deal table .
“ what sort of person ?
he gave me one other nod , compressed the post-office exceedingly , gave me one last nod , and went on with his breakfast .
it was a hurried breakfast with no taste in it .
” one of us , by the by , had not said it at all .
“ but did you say told’ or informed’ ?
it was the money left me , and the gains of the first few year wot i sent home to mr jaggers all for you when he first come arter you , agreeable to my letter .
him and compeyson had been in a bad thing with a rich lady some years afore , and they’d made a pot of money by it ;
biddy said no more .
and he called me to him , and gave me the invitation for myself and friends which wemmick had prepared me to receive .
“ well ?
wemmick was up early in the morning , and i am afraid i heard him cleaning my boots .
i don’t know why it should be a crack thing to be a brewer ;
after that i fell among those thieves , the nine figures , who seemed every evening to do something new to disguise themselves and baffle recognition .
i sometimes derived an impression , from his manner or from a whispered word or two which escaped him , that he pondered over the question whether he might have been a better man under better circumstances .
” “ there ” , being the window , i crossed to it , and stood “ there , ” in a very uncomfortable state of mind , looking out .
“ i could have told you that , orlick .
but if you think as money can make compensation to me for the loss of the little child what come to the forge and ever the best of friends !
“ halloa !
but everything in our intercourse did give me pain .
a man who had been soaked in water , and smothered in mud , and lamed by stones , and cut by flints , and stung by nettles , and torn by briars ;
“ your own , one day , my dear , and you will use it well .
but he won’t last long .
i presented him with a half-share in my boat , which was the occasion of his often coming down to hammersmith ;
this dialogue made us all uneasy , and me very uneasy .
“ might a mere warmint ask whose property ?
i distinctly understood that he was working himself up with its contents to make an end of me .
“ you’re on your oath , you know , pip’s comrade ?
mr jaggers had duly sent me his address ;
“ what i had to say to estella , miss havisham , i will say before you , presently in a few moments .
“ put the case that he lived in an atmosphere of evil , and that all he saw of children was their being generated in great numbers for certain destruction .
i earnestly hoped and prayed that he might die before the recorder’s report was made ;
the sergeant made some kind of report , and some entry in a book , and then the convict whom i call the other convict was drafted off with his guard , to go on board first .
there was something charmingly cordial and engaging in the manner in which after saying “ now , handel , ” as if it were the grave beginning of a portentous business exordium , he had suddenly given up that tone , stretched out his honest hand , and spoken like a schoolboy .
all i’ve got ain’t mine ;
we agreed that his remaining many days in his present hazard was not to be thought of .
but they had been stilled , and a hush had succeeded .
“ yes , sir .
“ rum , ” repeated the stranger .
she set the dish on , touched my guardian quietly on the arm with a finger to notify that dinner was ready , and vanished .
” said mr wemmick , “ except at last .
the very stars to which i then raised my eyes , i am afraid i took to be but poor and humble stars for glittering on the rustic objects among which i had passed my life .
she took no notice of me until she had the candle in her hand , when she looked over her shoulder , superciliously saying , “ you are to come this way to-day , ” and took me to quite another part of the house .
but there was a calm , a rest , a virtuous hush , consequent on these examinations of our affairs that gave me , for the time , an admirable opinion of myself .
“ so new to him , ” she muttered , “ so old to me ;
but if you have any objection , this is the time to mention it .
“ because i’ll never cry for you again , ” said i .
“ that’s a real flagstaff , you see , ” said wemmick , “ and on sundays i run up a real flag .
“ you are not afraid of a woman who has never seen the sun since you were born ?
but joe more than readily undertook the care of her on that sunday afternoon , and biddy and i went out together .
but it is very possible to know how it has touched one’s self in going by , and i know right well that any good that intermixed itself with my apprenticeship came of plain contented joe , and not of restlessly aspiring discontented me .
from which i at once inferred that he had never seen miss havisham , for she was nothing of the kind .
if you should want anything , i’ll go and fetch it .
“ or , ” said estella , “ which is a nearer case , if you had taught her , from the dawn of her intelligence , with your utmost energy and might , that there was such a thing as daylight , but that it was made to be her enemy and destroyer , and she must always turn against it , for it had blighted you and would else blight her ;
gargery is your master now .
“ well , pip !
for the rest , he was a young gentleman in a grey suit (when not denuded for battle) , with his elbows , knees , wrists , and heels considerably in advance of the rest of him as to development .
however novel and peculiar this testimony of attachment , i did not doubt the accuracy of the interpretation .
he laid down the carving-knife and fork , being engaged in carving , at the moment , put his two hands into his disturbed hair , and appeared to make an extraordinary effort to lift himself up by it .
for estella’s sake .
“ and necessarily , ” she added , in a haughty tone ;
far into the night , miss havisham’s words , “ love her , love her , love her !
” in the room over that , a little flabby terrier of a clerk with dangling hair (his cropping seemed to have been forgotten when he was a puppy) was similarly engaged with a man with weak eyes , whom mr wemmick presented to me as a smelter who kept his pot always boiling , and who would melt me anything i pleased , and who was in an excessive white-perspiration , as if he had been trying his art on himself .
a certain stop that mr jaggers came to in his manner he was too self-possessed to change his manner , but he could not help its being brought to an indefinably attentive stop assured me that he did not know who her father was .
“ i had been shut up in these rooms a long time (i don’t know how long ;
i knew mrs joe’s housekeeping to be of the strictest kind , and that my larcenous researches might find nothing available in the safe .
for an hour or more , i remained too stunned to think ;
he nodded .
that he seemed to descry capital in the distance , rather clearly , after dinner ;
to be sure , it was a deserted place , down to the pigeon-house in the brewery-yard , which had been blown crooked on its pole by some high wind , and would have made the pigeons think themselves at sea , if there had been any pigeons there to be rocked by it .
“ what item was it you were at , wemmick , when mr pip came in ?
i know nothing of weeks of the year .
there were printed bills on the gate and on bits of carpet hanging out of the windows , announcing a sale by auction of the household furniture and effects , next week .
” said wemmick , contemplating the old man , with his hard face really softened ;
after a little while , she raised her head , and looked at the fire again .
“ what next , i mean ?
let’s put ’em on !
” said he .
oblige me with your opinion of this style !
ahoy !
as we passed mr barley’s door , he was heard hoarsely muttering within , in a strain that rose and fell like wind , the following refrain , in which i substitute good wishes for something quite the reverse :
if he had come back for his two bank-notes there could have been no dispute about them , because my sister was fully prepared to restore them .
a few faces hurried to glowing windows and looked after us , but none came out .
“ the first and the main thing to be done , ” said herbert , “ is to get him out of england .
“ then to make an end of it , ” said joe , delightedly handing the bag to my sister ;
what did you play at , boy ?
o the many , many nights and days through which the unquiet spirit within me haunted that house when estella lived there !
“ i ought to have , ” said herbert , “ for i have not much else .
i calculated the consequences of replying “ four hundred pound , ” and finding them against me , went as near the answer as i could which was somewhere about eightpence off .
you’re in the habit of shaking hands ?
the whole population of portsmouth (nine in number at the last census) turning out on the beach to rub their own hands and shake everybody else’s , and sing “ fill , fill !
” upon which he put down his head , blew a cloud of smoke out of his nose , and vanished with a kick-up of his hind-legs and a flourish of his tail .
but the forge was a very short distance off , and i went towards it under the sweet green limes , listening for the clink of joe’s hammer .
the sound of her iron shoes upon the hard road was quite musical , as she came along at a much brisker trot than usual .
“ if what i had upon me when taken had been real , mr wemmick , ” said the man , unwilling to let his hand go , “ i should have asked the favour of your wearing another ring in acknowledgment of your attentions .
not at all deterred by his replying in his heavy reticent way , but apparently led on by it to screw discourse out of him .
i cordially assented .
do it twenty or fifty times , and there is nothing special in your doing it the twenty-first or fifty-first .
howbeit , he liked me still less .
“ there was a question just now , mr jaggers , which you desired me to waive for a moment .
“ pip .
i felt here , through a tingling in my blood , that if mr drummle’s shoulder had claimed another hair’s breadth of room , i should have jerked him into the window ;
it was with a depressed heart that i walked in the starlight for an hour and more , about the courtyard , and about the brewery , and about the ruined garden .
while he sat at his ease guessing nothing , and eating bacon and hot roll , in (if i may be allowed the expression) a gorging and gormandizing manner .
“ and bless my heart , ” i involuntarily added aloud , “ it’s to-night !
mindful , then , of what we had read together , i thought of the two men who went up into the temple to pray , and i knew there were no better words that i could say beside his bed , than “ o lord , be merciful to him a sinner !
by that time it wanted but ten minutes of one o’clock , and we began to look out for her smoke .
” said he .
no doubt my health would be much better if it was otherwise , still i wouldn’t change my disposition if i could .
well !
after that , he drank all the rest of the sherry , and mr hubble drank the port , and the two talked (which i have since observed to be customary in such cases) as if they were of quite another race from the deceased , and were notoriously immortal .
our lights warmed the air about us with their pitchy blaze , and the two prisoners seemed rather to like that , as they limped along in the midst of the muskets .
” said i .
now brushing against the skirts of the visitors , now giving them the whole length of the dismal chamber .
in some of her looks and gestures there was that tinge of resemblance to miss havisham which may often be noticed to have been acquired by children , from grown person with whom they have been much associated and secluded , and which , when childhood is passed , will produce a remarkable occasional likeness of expression between faces that are otherwise quite different .
my sister went for the stone bottle , came back with the stone bottle , and poured his brandy out :
“ leave any for him ?
he nodded assent , and pulled out his thief-dreaded watch , and asked me where i was going to dine ?
” and we soon got clear of them , and went on side by side .
all that you have given me , is at your command to have again .
“ what else could i do ?
“ with money down ?
“ for he has been hovering about you all night .
“ anything else ?
and he piped and shook , as the aged turnpike-keeper who had heard blows , to an extent so very paralytic as to suggest a doubt regarding the mental competency of that witness .
(you liked your bit of game , didn’t you ?) no ;
the other convict was livid to look at , and , in addition to the old bruised left side of his face , seemed to be bruised and torn all over .
let me finish wot i was a telling you , dear boy .
“ why , you are crying !
for i had a presentiment that i should never be there again , and i felt that the dying light was suited to my last view of it .
then i would say to her , “ biddy , i think you once liked me very well , when my errant heart , even while it strayed away from you , was quieter and better with you than it ever has been since .
he then explained this affectionate apostrophe , by touching his brooch representing the lady and the weeping willow at the tomb with the urn upon it , and saying , “ had it made for me , express !
but what is his sleight of hand to mine , when i fold up my own nutshells and pass them on myself as notes !
i don’t know , ” returned biddy , smiling .
it was never so well worth your while to get me out of this country as it is to-night .
but , joe had sanctified it , and i had believed in it .
and i love her !
the coach , with mr jaggers inside , came up in due time , and i took my box-seat again , and arrived in london safe , but not sound , for my heart was gone .
i thought it a little too much that he should complain of being cut short in his flower after all , as if he had not been running to seed , leaf after leaf , ever since his course began .
“ here’s the dutch-clock a-working himself up to being equal to strike eight of ’em , and she’s not come home yet !
“ not to go into the things that compeyson planned , and i done which ’ud take a week i’ll simply say to you , dear boy , and pip’s comrade , that that man got me into such nets as made me his black slave .
” said mr jaggers , warming the backs of his legs with the backs of his warmed hands , “ i’ll be plain with you , my friend pip .
but i think i see it .
a new fear had been engendered in my mind by his narrative ;
i had pulled down as far as greenwich with the ebb tide , and had turned with the tide .
all the others who were waiting saw him at the same time , and there was quite a rush at him .
“ here am i , getting on in the first year of my time , and , since the day of my being bound , i have never thanked miss havisham , or asked after her , or shown that i remember her .
then i did the same for herbert (who modestly said he had not my administrative genius) , and felt that i had brought his affairs into a focus for him .
however , i temporized with myself , of course for , was i not wavering between right and wrong , when the thing is always done ?
for , i had no knowledge of it through the sense of feeling .
the theatre where mr wopsle had achieved his questionable triumph was in that water-side neighbourhood (it is nowhere now) , and to that theatre i resolved to go .
” then he let himself down again , and became silent .
i was disconcerted , for i had broken away without quite seeing where i was going to .
” i asked , determined not to yield an inch of the fire .
” said joe , astounded .
i had not got as much further down the street as the post-office , when i again beheld trabb’s boy shooting round by a back way .
in her other hand she had a crutch-headed stick on which she leaned , and she looked like the witch of the place .
it brushes the newgate cobwebs away , and pleases the aged .
“ more than that , ” said he , folding his arms on the table again , “ i won’t have a rag of you , i won’t have a bone of you , left on earth .
so , when we went into the parlour where mrs whimple and clara were seated at work , i said nothing of my own interest in mr campbell , but kept it to myself .
turn to the paper .
you little thought , ” said mr pumblechook , apostrophising the fowl in the dish , “ when you was a young fledgling , what was in store for you .
” i asked .
this morose journeyman had no liking for me .
why are you looking at that dark tree in the lane ?
i had not advanced another two hundred yards when , to my inexpressible terror , amazement , and indignation , i again beheld trabb’s boy approaching .
“ ah !
and so she presently said joe’ again , and once pardon ,’ and once pip .’ and so she never lifted her head up any more , and it was just an hour later when we laid it down on her own bed , because we found she was gone .
if that staid old house near the green at richmond should ever come to be haunted when i am dead , it will be haunted , surely , by my ghost .
not so high but that i could struggle up and hold on long enough to look over it , and see that the rank garden was the garden of the house , and that it was overgrown with tangled weeds , but that there was a track upon the green and yellow paths , as if some one sometimes walked there , and that estella was walking away from me even then .
that i had a fever and was avoided , that i suffered greatly , that i often lost my reason , that the time seemed interminable , that i confounded impossible existences with my own identity ;
you have been very good to me , and i owe everything to you .
“ joe gargery , ma’am .
“ i understand you perfectly .
if it’s not in any way disagreeable to you , you’ll oblige me by doing the same .
does the thought-contracted brow of the local sage or the lustrous eye of local beauty inquire whose fortunes ?
for , he was a most delightful lecturer on domestic economy , and his treatises on the management of children and servants were considered the very best text-books on those themes .
“ which dear old pip , old chap , ” said joe , “ you and me was ever friends .
“ but he is accused of it .
how do you find yourself ?
everything was unchanged , and miss havisham was alone .
” it was the certainty of this fact that impelled me to offer the hint .
herbert and startop were to occupy one ;
our conference being now ended , and everything arranged , i rose to go ;
wasn’t i ?
so , when i had pledged myself to comfort and abet herbert in the affair of his heart by all practicable and impracticable means , and when herbert had told me that his affianced already knew me by reputation and that i should be presented to her , and when we had warmly shaken hands upon our mutual confidence , we blew out our candles , made up our fire , locked our door , and issued forth in quest of mr wopsle and denmark .
nor biddy ain’t .
to-morrow is the first of june .
“ well , miss ?
there was a sofa where mr pocket stood , and he dropped upon it in the attitude of the dying gladiator .
“ to have provis for an upper lodger is quite a godsend to mrs whimple , ” said herbert , “ for of course people in general won’t stand that noise .
when he was not asleep , or playing a complicated kind of patience with a ragged pack of cards of his own , a game that i never saw before or since , and in which he recorded his winnings by sticking his jackknife into the table , when he was not engaged in either of these pursuits , he would ask me to read to him , “ foreign language , dear boy !
i do not recall that i felt any tenderness of conscience in reference to mrs joe , when the fear of being found out was lifted off me .
“ it would have been cruel in miss havisham , horribly cruel , to practise on the susceptibility of a poor boy , and to torture me through all these years with a vain hope and an idle pursuit , if she had reflected on the gravity of what she did .
joe fell into the deepest disgrace with both , for offering the bright suggestion that i might only be presented with one of the dogs who had fought for the veal-cutlets .
tickler was a wax-ended piece of cane , worn smooth by collision with my tickled frame .
this occasion shall not entirely pass without that affability on your part .
i thanked him and said i would .
the air of completeness and superiority with which she walked at my side , and the air of youthfulness and submission with which i walked at hers , made a contrast that i strongly felt .
but however fast i went , i couldn’t warm my feet , to which the damp cold seemed riveted , as the iron was riveted to the leg of the man i was running to meet .
“ it may be all quite true , ” said i to biddy , “ but i admire her dreadfully .
“ is a counting-house profitable ?
“ it has been a memorable time for me , joe .
“ i ask wemmick to put it to himself very carefully .
it bewildered me , and under its influence i continued at heart to hate my trade and to be ashamed of home .
now , i come to the cruel part of the story , merely breaking off , my dear handel , to remark that a dinner-napkin will not go into a tumbler .
“ it’s a great cake .
“ i heerd , ” returned joe , “ as it were not miss havisham , old chap .
“ getting near gun-fire , ” said wemmick then , as he laid down his pipe ;
“ what i think of , wemmick , is the poor owner of the property .
but it’s no more of a pity now , than it was this day twelvemonth don’t you see ?
sing !
the injury to his chest (which rendered his breathing extremely painful) he thought he had received against the side of the galley .
“ and what’s the best of all , ” he said , “ you’ve been more comfortable alonger me , since i was under a dark cloud , than when the sun shone .
as she was (very bad handwriting apart) a more than indifferent speller , and as joe was a more than indifferent reader , extraordinary complications arose between them which i was always called in to solve .
indeed , when i knew her better i began to think it was a mercy she had any features at all , so very blank and high was the dead wall of her face .
you had a particular fancy for me , hadn’t you , old artful ?
“ you should think !
“ i’ll eat my breakfast afore they’re the death of me , ” said he .
the allusion made me spring up ;
and he held my hand while all the others were removed , and while the audience got up (putting their dresses right , as they might at church or elsewhere) , and pointed down at this criminal or at that , and most of all at him and me .
“ from information i have received , ” said he , looking round at us as we all quailed before him , “ i have reason to believe there is a blacksmith among you , by name joseph or joe gargery .
i told him i must go , but he took no notice , so i thought the best thing i could do was to slip off .
we were always more or less miserable , and most of our acquaintance were in the same condition .
i am sure i shall be very happy to show london to you .
he came of rich people down in somersetshire , who had nursed this combination of qualities until they made the discovery that it was just of age and a blockhead .
” i always treated him as a larger species of child , and as no more than my equal .
i rather thought i would give up that point too .
come !
i’m so frightened !
“ holy father , mithter jaggerth !
miss skiffins was of a wooden appearance , and was , like her escort , in the post-office branch of the service .
“ where should we be going , but home ?
i said i should be delighted to do it .
i whistled and made nothing of going .
we all three went into the street together , and from the door-step wemmick turned his way , and mr jaggers and i turned ours .
“ and mr wemmick made them , ” added miss skiffins , “ with his own hands out of his own head .
as to altering my way of living by enlarging my expenses , i put it to him whether in our present unsettled and difficult circumstances , it would not be simply ridiculous , if it were no worse ?
” and the clergyman came to so gloomy a pause upon it , that i had doubts for the moment whether we should get completely married that day .
bound out of hand .
at that point , my convict became so frantically exasperated , that he would have rushed upon him but for the interposition of the soldiers .
here joe’s hat tumbled off the mantel-piece , and he started out of his chair and picked it up , and fitted it to the same exact spot .
how did she murder ?
i went to his room , and he was not there .
i heard mr hubble remark that “ a bit of savory pork pie would lay atop of anything you could mention , and do no harm , ” and i heard joe say , “ you shall have some , pip .
i swore arterwards , sure as ever i spec’lated and got rich , you should get rich .
the look-out was kept , long after all was still again and the two steamers were gone ;
ah me !
there was an air of reservation in the answer which increased my perplexity , and the answer was , that her maid believed she was only coming back at all for a little while .
do you feel that you have lost her ?
there was an air of toleration or depreciation about his utterance of these words that rather depressed me ;
“ i can’t guess what it is , ma’am .
estella was knitting , and miss havisham was looking on .
if you want information regarding your uncle provis , you had much better come and tell no one , and lose no time .
“ what are you going to do to me ?
this led to mr wopsle’s (who had never been heard of before) coming in with a star and garter on , as a plenipotentiary of great power direct from the admiralty , to say that the swabs were all to go to prison on the spot , and that he had brought the boatswain down the union jack , as a slight acknowledgment of his public services .
well , pip ;
not very strong , that hope , if you went soldiering !
” said joe .
as soon as i could recover myself sufficiently , i hurried out after him and looked for him in the neighbouring streets ;
i looked again at those hands and eyes of the housekeeper , and thought of the inexplicable feeling that had come over me when i last walked not alone in the ruined garden , and through the deserted brewery .
i never shall forget the radiant face with which he came home one afternoon , and told me , as a mighty piece of news , of his having fallen in with one clarriker (the young merchant’s name) , and of clarriker’s having shown an extraordinary inclination towards him , and of his belief that the opening had come at last .
it does me good fur to look at you , pip .
“ are they alive now ?
” repeated my sister , more sharply than before .
gargery .’ them were her words ;
“ was that kind ?
“ mr pip and friend ?
“ is she dead , joe ?
my father’s family name being pirrip , and my christian name philip , my infant tongue could make of both names nothing longer or more explicit than pip .
we thought it best that he should stay in his own rooms ;
i went on with my explanation , and told her how i had hoped to complete the transaction out of my means , but how in this i was disappointed .
but when herbert and i had held our momentous conversation , i was seized with a feverish conviction that i ought to hunt the matter down , that i ought not to let it rest , but that i ought to see mr jaggers , and come at the bare truth .
“ it’s the genuine look .
“ never mind what i make it , my friend , ” observed mr jaggers , with a knowing and contradictory toss of his head .
” (we all began to think mr wopsle full of subterfuge .) “ well ?
and , as i looked up into the corners of the tester over my head , i thought what a number of blue-bottle flies from the butchers’ , and earwigs from the market , and grubs from the country , must be holding on up there , lying by for next summer .
her contempt for me was so strong , that it became infectious , and i caught it .
“ all right , john ;
“ no , ” said he ;
entreating herbert to tell me how he had come to my rescue , which at first he had flatly refused to do , but had insisted on my remaining quiet , i learnt that i had in my hurry dropped the letter , open , in our chambers , where he , coming home to bring with him startop whom he had met in the street on his way to me , found it , very soon after i was gone .
i had heard of miss havisham up town , everybody for miles round had heard of miss havisham up town , as an immensely rich and grim lady who lived in a large and dismal house barricaded against robbers , and who led a life of seclusion .
is it to be wondered at if my thoughts were dazed , as my eyes were , when i came out into the natural light from the misty yellow rooms ?
“ and you , ” said i , “ are the pale young gentleman !
yes ,’ says compeyson’s wife .
we must have him bound .
“ one day is so like another here , ” he replied , “ that i don’t know without casting it up .
“ live in london ?
i dropped my face into my hands , but was able to control myself better than i could have expected , considering what agony it gave me to hear her say those words .
and your husband’s there !
“ you have been crying till you are half blind , and you are near crying again now .
“ biddy , ” said i , after binding her to secrecy , “ i want to be a gentleman .
joe looked at me for a single instant with something faintly like reproach .
“ i tell you what , young fellow , ” said she , “ i didn’t bring you up by hand to badger people’s lives out .
” said mr jaggers , in the same devastating strain :
“ till you’re a gentleman , ” said biddy .
” i thanked him gratefully , and asked , “ might i speak to him , if he can hear me ?
there was a courtyard in front , and that was barred ;
“ mr drummle , ” said mrs pocket , “ will you ring for flopson ?
“ which it is well beknown to yourself , pip , ” returned joe , strengthening his former mixture of argumentation , confidence , and politeness , “ that it were the wish of your own hart .
if you had brought up your adopted daughter wholly in the dark confinement of these rooms , and had never let her know that there was such a thing as the daylight by which she had never once seen your face , if you had done that , and then , for a purpose had wanted her to understand the daylight and know all about it , you would have been disappointed and angry ?
blow the fire , blow the fire old clem !
” said wemmick .
she shook her head .
o , those people with miss havisham , and the tortures they undergo !
the last i heard of him , i stopped in the mist to listen , and the file was still going .
but in the general tumbling up of the family , his tumbling out in life somewhere , was a thing to transact itself somehow .
“ i might a took warning by arthur , but i didn’t ;
“ she was proud and insulting , and you wanted to go away from her .
“ but you are coming back to dinner , joe ?
let my body be where it would , my spirit was always wandering , wandering , wandering , about that house .
though not until mr wopsle in his poetic fury had severely mauled me .
but i have come into a handsome property .
all the children of the village , and most of the women , were admiring these sable warders and the closed windows of the house and forge ;
years afterwards , i made a dreadful likeness of that woman , by causing a face that had no other natural resemblance to it than it derived from flowing hair to pass behind a bowl of flaming spirits in a dark room .
i opened my eyes in the night , and i saw , in the great chair at the bedside , joe .
with a last faint effort , which would have been powerless but for my yielding to it and assisting it , he raised my hand to his lips .
it appeared to be a collection of back lanes , ditches , and little gardens , and to present the aspect of a rather dull retirement .
“ i think , ” said joe , after meditating a long time , and looking rather evasively at the window-seat , “ as i did hear tell that how he were something or another in a general way in that direction .
she took it up , and we went through more passages and up a staircase , and still it was all dark , and only the candle lighted us .
for i sought to get into the town quietly by the unfrequented ways , and to leave it in the same manner .
” and how should i be able to answer , dodged in that way , in a strange place , on an empty stomach !
“ pray , ” said i , as the two odious casts with the twitchy leer upon them caught my sight again , “ whose likenesses are those ?
” interposed the grave lady .
but i knowed you couldn’t be that .
“ o dear old pip , old chap , ” said joe .
chapter xxxi .
but when she was gone , i looked about me for a place to hide my face in , and got behind one of the gates in the brewery-lane , and leaned my sleeve against the wall there , and leaned my forehead on it and cried .
i was so doubtful of myself now , and put so much trust in him , that i could not satisfy myself whether i ought to refer to it when he did not .
to avoid being too abrupt , i then spoke of the aged and of miss skiffins .
you gained it for yourself .
when i got acquainted with your sister , it were the talk how she was bringing you up by hand .
i never had any reason to doubt the exact truth of what he thus told me .
“ do you mean to keep that name ?
“ o no , i think not , biddy .
“ very well .
“ come now and then ;
there , there !
“ come , mr drummle , since we are on the subject , i’ll tell you what passed between herbert here and me , when you borrowed that money .
“ do you want me then , ” said estella , turning suddenly with a fixed and serious , if not angry , look , “ to deceive and entrap you ?
clarriker informing me on that occasion that the affairs of the house were steadily progressing , that he would now be able to establish a small branch-house in the east which was much wanted for the extension of the business , and that herbert in his new partnership capacity would go out and take charge of it , i found that i must have prepared for a separation from my friend , even though my own affairs had been more settled .
i like that spider though .
“ ah !
” i added this saving clause , in the moment of rejecting four richly caparisoned coursers which i had had wild thoughts of harnessing .
our eyes met , and all the “ sir ” melted out of that manly heart as he gave me his hand .
the officer who steered the galley gave the same account of their going overboard .
but that it is a miserable thing , i can testify .
i could not help looking at the fire , in an obvious state of doubt .
“ is it your own , mr wemmick ?
i tell this lightly , but it was no light thing to me .
and a little squat shoal-lighthouse on open piles stood crippled in the mud on stilts and crutches ;
“ my own doing , ” said wemmick .
“ on this day of the year , long before you were born , this heap of decay , ” stabbing with her crutched stick at the pile of cobwebs on the table , but not touching it , “ was brought here .
but if you would give me a turn now and then in the quality of a townsman , i should greatly esteem it .
no one remained now but the excitable jew , who had already raised the skirts of mr jaggers’s coat to his lips several times .
it was mr jaggers’s hand , and he passed it through my arm .
finding that the afternoon coach was gone , and finding that his uneasiness grew into positive alarm , as obstacles came in his way , he resolved to follow in a post-chaise .
all done , all gone !
and then he made his shot , and a most extraordinary shot it was .
the chambers are retired , and we shall be alone together , but we shan’t fight , i dare say .
after an hour or so of this travelling , we came to a rough wooden hut and a landing-place .
when miss havisham done the handsome thing by you , she called me back to say to me as that were all .
what with rum and pepper , and pepper and rum , i should think his pegging must be nearly over .
how did you come there , that day ?
selecting from the few queer houses upon mill pond bank a house with a wooden front and three stories of bow-window (not bay-window , which is another thing) , i looked at the plate upon the door , and read there , mrs whimple .
the delicacy with which joe dismissed this theme , and the sweet tact and kindness with which biddy who with her woman’s wit had found me out so soon had prepared him for it , made a deep impression on my mind .
a deficient , ill-tempered , lowering , stupid fellow .
” repeated my sister .
i do .
i am glad to tell you so .
he came to the rescue at this point , and said in a consolatory and complimentary voice , “ camilla , my dear , it is well known that your family feelings are gradually undermining you to the extent of making one of your legs shorter than the other .
he put it back again , stuck his pipe in a button-hole of his coat , spread a hand on each knee , and after turning an angry eye on the fire for a few silent moments , looked round at us and said what follows .
it’s very well done , but it won’t do ;
“ five pounds ?
you didn’t mention your name , by the bye .
but we dined in the best parlour , not in the old kitchen , and joe was so exceedingly particular what he did with his knife and fork and the saltcellar and what not , that there was great restraint upon us .
added to that , he had a blockhead confidence in his money and in his family greatness , which sometimes did him good service , almost taking the place of concentration and determined purpose .
i did .
he stopped in his looking at me , and slowly rubbed his right hand over his head .
” said i .
i wondered whether the two swollen faces were of mr jaggers’s family , and , if he were so unfortunate as to have had a pair of such ill-looking relations , why he stuck them on that dusty perch for the blacks and flies to settle on , instead of giving them a place at home .
in good time they too started up strong and well , and we admitted the sharp morning air at the windows , and looked at the tide that was still flowing towards us .
poor dear joe , entangled in a little black cloak tied in a large bow under his chin , was seated apart at the upper end of the room ;
don’t you know , pip ?
” said i .
“ you have heard of a man of bad character , whose true name is compeyson ?
so anxiously looked forward to , charged with such consequences , its results so impenetrably hidden , though so near .
“ i was not quite sure , sir , but i thought so .
as i passed the church , i felt (as i had felt during service in the morning) a sublime compassion for the poor creatures who were destined to go there , sunday after sunday , all their lives through , and to lie obscurely at last among the low green mounds .
” she said , without being startled or surprised :
i saw in this the reason for my being staved off so long and the reason for my late guardian’s declining to commit himself to the formal knowledge of such a scheme .
we made all the haste we could downstairs , but we were not quick enough either .
who limped , and shivered , and glared , and growled ;
i have often asked myself the question since ;
“ so hard , so hard !
don’t be so good to me !
“ i suppose it will be difficult for you to remain here now , biddy dear ?
some , contingent on my coming into my property .
the old gentleman , however , experienced so much difficulty in getting his gloves on , that wemmick found it necessary to put him with his back against a pillar , and then to get behind the pillar himself and pull away at them , while i for my part held the old gentleman round the waist , that he might present an equal and safe resistance .
“ you are tired of me .
i now fell into a regular routine of apprenticeship life , which was varied beyond the limits of the village and the marshes , by no more remarkable circumstance than the arrival of my birthday and my paying another visit to miss havisham .
of course i had no experience of a london summer day , and my spirits may have been oppressed by the hot exhausted air , and by the dust and grit that lay thick on everything .
“ and magwitch in new south wales having at last disclosed himself , ” said mr jaggers , “ you will comprehend , pip , how rigidly throughout my communication with you , i have always adhered to the strict line of fact .
no one but themselves and mrs coiler the toady neighbour showed any interest in this part of the conversation , and it appeared to me that it was painful to herbert ;
by these approaches we arrived at unrestricted conversation .
a better proof of the severity of my bondage to that taskmaster could scarcely be afforded , than the degrading shifts to which i was constantly driven to find him employment .
i’ll tell you why , pip .
” said i .
he told me that he would look about him for such an orphan child .
the stranger looked at me again , still cocking his eye , as if he were expressly taking aim at me with his invisible gun , and said , “ he’s a likely young parcel of bones that .
and when he had done it he wiped the file and put it in a breast-pocket .
so convinced i was of that woman’s being her mother , that i wanted no evidence to establish the fact in my own mind .
if they disclosed to me , as i suspect they did , that i should not come back , and that biddy was quite right , all i can say is , they were quite right too .
biddy turned her face suddenly towards mine , and looked far more attentively at me than she had looked at the sailing ships .
instantly the ghost passed once more and was gone .
the steamer for hamburg and the steamer for rotterdam would start from london at about nine on thursday morning .
mr pumblechook made out , after carefully surveying the premises , that he had first got upon the roof of the forge , and had then got upon the roof of the house , and had then let himself down the kitchen chimney by a rope made of his bedding cut into strips ;
becoming alarmed , i entreated mr wopsle to explain his meaning .
that my hands were coarse ;
” she then smiled upon me in an absent state of mind , and asked me if i liked the taste of orange-flower water ?
“ but i didn’t go home .
“ every man’s business , ” said wemmick , rather reproachfully towards me , “ is portable property .
“ well , ” said joe , “ to tell you the truth , i ain’t much in the habit of drinking at anybody’s expense but my own .
“ at rum ?
“ i hope not !
“ when we was put in the dock , i noticed first of all what a gentleman compeyson looked , wi’ his curly hair and his black clothes and his white pocket-handkercher , and what a common sort of a wretch i looked .
for such reasons , i was very glad when ten o’clock came and we started for miss havisham’s ;
“ as punctual as ever , ” he repeated , coming up to us .
the more i thought of the fight , and recalled the pale young gentleman on his back in various stages of puffy and incrimsoned countenance , the more certain it appeared that something would be done to me .
and herbert came bursting in , with the airy freshness of six hundred miles of france upon him .
indeed , i see you do .
“ yes , miss havisham .
on the previous night , i had been sent straight to bed in an attic with a sloping roof , which was so low in the corner where the bedstead was , that i calculated the tiles as being within a foot of my eyebrows .
“ lookee here !
the matthew whom mr and mrs camilla had spoken of .
“ you’ve hit it , sir !
” i cried , struggling .
what do you think of her ?
and herbert , seeing that , did his utmost to hold my attention engaged .
i sat thinking of it long after he had ascended to the clouds in a large watch-case , and still i could not make it out .
“ this really is a very bad side of human nature !
“ do you see him ?
the aged’s reading reminded me of the classes at mr wopsle’s great-aunt’s , with the pleasanter peculiarity that it seemed to come through a keyhole .
“ i begin to think , ” said estella , in a musing way , after another moment of calm wonder , “ that i almost understand how this comes about .
don’t go on in that way with a subordinate .
“ is that confidence to be imparted to me soon ?
my heart was deeply and most deservedly humbled as i mused over the fire for an hour or more .
for instance , biddy , in his learning and his manners .
they both had weak eyes , which i had long attributed to their chronically looking in at keyholes , and they were always at hand when not wanted ;
whenever i watched the vessels standing out to sea with their white sails spread , i somehow thought of miss havisham and estella ;
i strained my sight upon the sparks that fell among the tinder , and upon which he breathed and breathed , match in hand , but i could only see his lips , and the blue point of the match ;
it’s yourn .
” said the sergeant , addressing himself to mr pumblechook , as to a man whose appreciative powers justified the inference that he was equal to the time .
“ that’s it , ” said joe .
he brought the bottle to his lips , and took a fiery drink from it ;
“ if i could have settled down , ” i said to biddy , plucking up the short grass within reach , much as i had once upon a time pulled my feelings out of my hair and kicked them into the brewery wall , “ if i could have settled down and been but half as fond of the forge as i was when i was little , i know it would have been much better for me .
“ of what ?
door !
deuce take me , ” he added , suddenly , “ i know i did .
forty-three pence ?
then potentially :
on the whole , i by no means recognised the analysis , but thought it not worth disputing .
and you , ” she said , in a voice of touching interest to a wanderer , “ you live abroad still ?
ain’t you , aged ?
uncle pumblechook , sensible of having deserved well of his fellow-creatures , said , quite vivaciously , all things considered , “ well , mrs joe , we’ll do our best endeavours ;
as i thought the time was now come for pursuing the theme i had at heart , i said , turning on mr jaggers :
i took advantage of a moment when joe had just looked at me , and got my bread and butter down my leg .
it happened so to catch her fancy that she took it up in a low brooding voice as if she were singing in her sleep .
i thanked him for his friendship and caution , and our discourse proceeded in a low tone , while i toasted the aged’s sausage and he buttered the crumb of the aged’s roll .
” i hazarded .
“ and she an’t over partial to having scholars on the premises , ” joe continued , “ and in partickler would not be over partial to my being a scholar , for fear as i might rise .
it had passed through my thoughts to cry out for help again ;
“ and then i shall come back for the dear little thing , and the dear little thing and i will walk quietly into the nearest church .
i han’t seen a way to get you safe , and i’ve looked arter you to know your ins and outs .
what i had never felt before was the friendly touch of the once insensible hand .
“ what man is that ?
when i had ordered everything i wanted , i directed my steps towards pumblechook’s , and , as i approached that gentleman’s place of business , i saw him standing at his door .
merely saying as to his second , that the tidings had indeed come suddenly , but that i had always wanted to be a gentleman , and had often and often speculated on what i would do , if i were one .
“ and think so ?
a man with no hat , and with broken shoes , and with an old rag tied round his head .
it was not because i was faithful , but because joe was faithful , that i never ran away and went for a soldier or a sailor .
it had been delivered by hand (of course , since i left home) , and its contents were these :
“ he hardly thought you’d come so soon , ” mr wemmick explained .
“ biddy , don’t you hear me ?
still , something must be done .
give me your hat .
” said he .
if there’s been any fault at all to-day , it’s mine .
give it me back , mum , ” said flopson ;
also , when we played at cards miss havisham would look on , with a miserly relish of estella’s moods , whatever they were .
“ i don’t know , ” i moodily answered .
” replied the old man .
look here , you sir .
to my surprise , he seemed at once to be principally if not solely interested in drummle .
mrs hubble shook her head , and contemplating me with a mournful presentiment that i should come to no good , asked , “ why is it that the young are never grateful ?
“ and what’s happened to you ?
when she held her hands out she took her eyes from mr jaggers , and turned them watchfully on every one of the rest of us in succession .
i answered , no .
” and then entered on a fearful catalogue of all the illnesses i had been guilty of , and all the acts of sleeplessness i had committed , and all the high places i had tumbled from , and all the low places i had tumbled into , and all the injuries i had done myself , and all the times she had wished me in my grave , and i had contumaciously refused to go there .
still you see , as far as it goes , a pair of pigeons are portable property all the same .
“ what do i make of it ?
“ and it are understood .
“ and what coarse hands he has !
through all his stages , mr jaggers followed him with the same strange interest .
” said the man .
i have no hurt but in this throbbing arm .
and don’t you remember tickler ?
“ yes , ” i answered .
gargery’s power to part you and tickler in sunders were not fully equal to his inclinations .
that would save at least a chance of suspicion , and any chance is worth saving .
but i have other causes of disquiet than any you know of .
” and then they congratulated me again , and went on to express so much wonder at the notion of my being a gentleman that i didn’t half like it .
and on friday morning i went to mr pumblechook’s , to put on my new clothes and pay my visit to miss havisham .
the night was as dark by this time as it would be until morning ;
“ if mr pip has the intention of going at once , ” said wemmick to mr jaggers , “ he needn’t write an answer , you know .
“ may i ask the name ?
“ unbind me .
” and there he remained so long saying , “ astonishing ” at intervals , so often , that i began to think his senses were never coming back .
but he then declared that the secret of herbert’s partnership had been long enough upon his conscience , and he must tell it .
“ and clara ?
i’m awful dull , but i hope i’ve beat out something nigh the rights of this at last .
” said mr jaggers .
look’ee here , pip .
i found miss sarah pocket still on duty at the gate ;
he wore his hat on the back of his head , and looked straight before him :
“ you have it .
as to the first figure now .
and now , handel , ” said he , finally throwing off the story as it were , “ there is a perfectly open understanding between us .
don’t you remember ?
the last wrist was much disfigured , deeply scarred and scarred across and across .
“ there he goes again , you see !
“ the person stopped , when he stopped to make inquiry of me , and the person took this way when he took this way .
too heavily out of sorts to care much at the time whether it were he or no , or after all to touch the breakfast , i washed the weather and the journey from my face and hands , and went out to the memorable old house that it would have been so much the better for me never to have entered , never to have seen .
miserably i went to bed after all , and miserably thought of estella , and miserably dreamed that my expectations were all cancelled , and that i had to give my hand in marriage to herbert’s clara , or play hamlet to miss havisham’s ghost , before twenty thousand people , without knowing twenty words of it .
we went into the house by a side door , the great front entrance had two chains across it outside , and the first thing i noticed was , that the passages were all dark , and that she had left a candle burning there .
“ are you in much pain to-day ?
” he replied .
” i asked him where we should come to (for i had no idea where he lived) , and i believe it was in his general objection to make anything like an admission , that he replied , “ come here , and i’ll take you home with me .
“ you ridiculous boy , ” said estella , “ will you never take warning ?
do you admire her ?
” better than he thought , except the last clause .
still , mrs pocket was in general the object of a queer sort of respectful pity , because she had not married a title ;
and then they stood about , as soldiers do ;
you will , will you ?
“ see , joe !
in another minute we were outside the gate , and it was locked , and estella was gone .
“ which do not overdo it , pip , ” said joe ;
and i should be false and base if i did not tell you , whether it is acceptable to you or no , and whether you are inclined to give credence to it or no , that you deeply wrong both mr matthew pocket and his son herbert , if you suppose them to be otherwise than generous , upright , open , and incapable of anything designing or mean .
nod away at him , if you please , like winking !
“ don’t be ridiculous , boy ;
you and me is not two figures to be together in london ;
he went last of all , because of having to be helped from his chair , and to go very slowly ;
yet a gentleman should not be unjust neither , ” said biddy , turning away her head .
i believe she had not shown much susceptibility up to that time ;
“ where’s your mother ?
“ what is to be done ?
yes , he came to the same end ;
then joe began to hammer and clink , hammer and clink , and we all looked on .
“ you don’t mind admitting that , i suppose ?
“ this is the way it was , that when i was a ragged little creetur as much to be pitied as ever i see (not that i looked in the glass , for there warn’t many insides of furnished houses known to me) , i got the name of being hardened .
“ well , pip ?
“ recollect yourself !
mr wopsle , the clerk at church , was to dine with us ;
and i won’t pretend i was partick’ler for where ’ud be the good on it , dear boy and comrade ?
if young pip has a half-holiday , do as much for old orlick .
think of what she is herself (now i am repulsive and you abominate me) .
we always derived profound satisfaction from making an appointment for this purpose .
deeming sunday the best day for taking mr wemmick’s walworth sentiments , i devoted the next ensuing sunday afternoon to a pilgrimage to the castle .
i fell asleep recalling what i “ used to do ” when i was at miss havisham’s ;
“ no , not christened pip .
“ that’s bentley drummle , ” i replied ;
i didn’t stop for life , dear boy and pip’s comrade , being here .
so mean is extremity , that i sometimes sent him to hyde park corner to see what o’clock it was .
of course i broke down there :
an involuntary shudder passed over both of us .
for he wore at least four mourning rings , besides a brooch representing a lady and a weeping willow at a tomb with an urn on it .
“ magwitch , ” he answered , in the same tone ;
“ i must think a moment .
there’s subjects enough as betwixt two sech , without onnecessary ones .
mr pocket , with the normal perplexity of his face heightened and his hair rumpled , looked at them for some minutes , as if he couldn’t make out how they came to be boarding and lodging in that establishment , and why they hadn’t been billeted by nature on somebody else .
this was when we were left alone on the night of the day when provis told us his story .
“ oh !
“ never mind what you have always longed for , mr pip , ” he retorted ;
i said (glancing at joe , who stood looking on , motionless) , that i supposed i could come directly .
“ it is necessary to tell him very little .
“ she knows better .
she said no more at the time ;
“ compliments , ” i said .
“ not named ?
this is the end of the first stage of pip’s expectations .
worth my while , too , to murder him , when i could do worse and drag him back !
“ i heard it had happened very lately .
“ now , ” said pumblechook , and all this with a most exasperating air of saying in the cause of virtue what was perfectly convincing and conclusive , “ i will tell you what to say to joseph .
“ this is a gay figure , pip , ” said she , making her crutch stick play round me , as if she , the fairy godmother who had changed me , were bestowing the finishing gift .
and i was listening , and thinking how the wind assailed and tore it , when i heard a footstep on the stair .
be seated .
there is already lodged in my hands a sum of money amply sufficient for your suitable education and maintenance .
” then he pushed miss havisham in her chair before him , with one of his large hands , and put the other in his trousers-pocket as if the pocket were full of secrets .
be that as it may , it did arise , and was not brought about by any one .
he won’t have a word to say to one of you ;
so strange to him , so familiar to me ;
and (i added) , i would gladly try that gentleman .
what else ?
” said she .
no matter with what other words we parted ;
i’m only a subordinate .
he had rolled a handkerchief round his head , and his face was set and lowering in his sleep .
but it is the same with any life .
“ never , estella !
but how could i remonstrate !
i saw that the dress had been put upon the rounded figure of a young woman , and that the figure upon which it now hung loose had shrunk to skin and bone .
“ a warmint , dear boy .
” said he , when he came to a stop .
” said he , with a deadly look .
even i got some .
i like the look of that fellow .
“ no , biddy , it makes no difference to me ;
” asked biddy , plucking a black-currant leaf .
“ p .s .
and to make it worse , they all asked me from time to time , in short , whenever they had nothing else to do , why i didn’t enjoy myself ?
and her speech was unintelligible .
the half-hour and the rum and water running out together , joe got up to go , and took me by the hand .
“ try a tenderer bit .
you are quite aware of that ?
on opening the outer door of our chambers with my key , i found a letter in the box , directed to me ;
are you ready to play ?
here is a chicken had round from the boar , here is a tongue had round from the boar , here’s one or two little things had round from the boar , that i hope you may not despise .
the whole business was so cleverly managed , that herbert had not the least suspicion of my hand being in it .
i was in mortal terror of myself , from whom an awful promise had been extracted ;
“ come here !
you’ll get nothing .
as hot as if it were an outrage on myself .
“ which you have that growed , ” said joe , “ and that swelled , and that gentle-folked ;
“ o miss havisham , ” said i , “ i can do it now .
“ but you can’t help groaning , my dear handel .
have you paid wemmick ?
for several reasons , and not least because i didn’t clearly know what mr jaggers would be found to be “ at , ” i replied in the affirmative .
“ but supposing you did ?
in mrs brandley’s house and out of mrs brandley’s house , i suffered every kind and degree of torture that estella could cause me .
long-suffering and loving joe , you never complain .
thus it was :
“ i should have written if i had thought that .
the once white cloth all yellow and withered ;
” the old gentleman , not in the least knowing what point of the ceremony we had arrived at , stood most amiably beaming at the ten commandments .
“ no .
” said joe , in a comfortable tone , “ i’m sure of that .
“ i’m much of your opinion , boy , ” said he .
” said joe .
joe got off with half a pint ;
they took up several obviously wrong people , and they ran their heads very hard against wrong ideas , and persisted in trying to fit the circumstances to the ideas , instead of trying to extract ideas from the circumstances .
“ not the least .
some , to fall due at certain dates out of my income :
i got through some jargon to the effect that i took the liberty of doubting that .
come to play .
and at the best , how indefinite and unsatisfactory , only to know so vaguely what they are !
i knew nothing then of the discoveries that are occasionally made of bodies buried in ancient times , which fall to powder in the moment of being distinctly seen ;
“ him too ;
in the meantime , mrs joe put clean white curtains up , and tacked a new flowered flounce across the wide chimney to replace the old one , and uncovered the little state parlour across the passage , which was never uncovered at any other time , but passed the rest of the year in a cool haze of silver paper , which even extended to the four little white crockery poodles on the mantel-shelf , each with a black nose and a basket of flowers in his mouth , and each the counterpart of the other .
he was gobbling mincemeat , meatbone , bread , cheese , and pork pie , all at once :
” he said to himself .
” and then said aloud , “ my view is a little classic and thoughtful for them here ;
as he was at present dressed in a seafaring slop suit , in which he looked as if he had some parrots and cigars to dispose of , i next discussed with him what dress he should wear .
then miss skiffins and john both tumbled open together , and finally shut up together .
“ very well , then , ” said i , to whom this was a new and not unwelcome light , “ i have never left off adoring her .
” said i .
all otherth ith cag-maggerth , give me jaggerth !
“ to sleep ?
i am not curious .
you’ll want some money .
these extensive arrangements occasioned us to be cut off unceremoniously in respect of breakfast ;
” returned wemmick .
by degrees she led me into more temperate talk , and she told me how joe loved me , and how joe never complained of anything , she didn’t say , of me ;
“ what’s death ?
“ yes , sir , ” said both the men together .
for myself , i found that i was expressing my tendency to lavish expenditure , and to patronise herbert , and to boast of my great prospects , before i quite knew that i had opened my lips .
it was ten o’clock at night before we ventured to creep in again , and then she asked joe why he hadn’t married a negress slave at once ?
mr wopsle , joe , and i , received strict charge to keep in the rear , and to speak no word after we reached the marshes .
we had made some pale efforts in the beginning to applaud mr wopsle ;
” there being still no answer , i went out at the door , irresolute what to do .
“ i’ve done wonderfully well .
” cried joe , opening his blue eyes wide , “ what a scholar you are !
humbly beseeching pardon , as i did , of heaven ;
“ all right , ” said the sergeant .
it revived my utmost indignation to find that she was still pursued by this fellow , and i felt inveterate against him .
“ no indeed , miss havisham .
it and i have worn away together .
“ have a little brandy , uncle , ” said my sister .
by dint of this ingenious scheme , his gloves were got on to perfection .
and the communication i have got to make is , that he has great expectations .
” cried my sister .
here is squires of the boar present , known and respected in this town , and here is william , which his father’s name was potkins if i do not deceive myself .
which was a pleasant one , and so furnished as that i could use it with comfort for my own private sitting-room .
with that , i poked tremendously , and having done so , planted myself side by side with mr drummle , my shoulders squared and my back to the fire .
that is his employer , gentlemen .
“ no , pip , ” returned joe , still looking at the fire , and holding his knees tight , as if he had private information that they intended to make off somewhere , “ which i left it to yourself , pip .
” said mr pumblechook .
like a sort of rebel , don’t you see ?
wemmick was at his desk , lunching and crunching on a dry hard biscuit ;
when i at last took courage to return to the room , i found estella sitting at miss havisham’s knee , taking up some stitches in one of those old articles of dress that were dropping to pieces , and of which i have often been reminded since by the faded tatters of old banners that i have seen hanging up in cathedrals .
his name is mr barley .
the office is one thing , and private life is another .
as i brought another of the ragged chairs to the hearth and sat down , i remarked a new expression on her face , as if she were afraid of me .
they laid it bare , and did what they could .
a tremulous uncertainty of the action of all her limbs soon became a part of her regular state , and afterwards , at intervals of two or three months , she would often put her hands to her head , and would then remain for about a week at a time in some gloomy aberration of mind .
at about this time , i began to observe that he was getting flushed in the face ;
estella left me standing near the door , and i stood there until miss havisham cast her eyes upon me from the dressing-table .
” cried herbert , as if i had made a guess of extraordinary merit .
we swept on , and i felt that i was highly obnoxious to camilla .
he complied , and we groped our way down the dark stairs together .
but their own allotted places in the great procession of the dead were not far off , and they would soon drop into them and go the silent way of the rest .
i told him , and he was attentive until i had finished , and then burst out laughing again , and asked me if i was sore afterwards ?
, joe ?
“ belinda , ” remonstrated mr pocket , from the other end of the table , “ how can you be so unreasonable ?
the river , still dark and mysterious , was spanned by bridges that were turning coldly grey , with here and there at top a warm touch from the burning in the sky .
i was not expected , and my bed would not be ready ;
he was a mild , good-natured , sweet-tempered , easy-going , foolish , dear fellow , a sort of hercules in strength , and also in weakness .
nor was there any drawback on my little turret bedroom , beyond there being such a very thin ceiling between me and the flagstaff , that when i lay down on my back in bed , it seemed as if i had to balance that pole on my forehead all night .
” said miss havisham .
compeyson says to me , separate defences , no communication ,’ and that was all .
as we began to be more used to one another , miss havisham talked more to me , and asked me such questions as what had i learnt and what was i going to be ?
yes , yes !
you can scarcely realise to yourself the hatred those people feel for you .
my sister looked at pumblechook :
there were stronger differences between him and her than there had been between him and his father , and it is suspected that he cherished a deep and mortal grudge against her as having influenced the father’s anger .
the falser he , the truer joe ;
and we all had cake and wine on gold plates .
“ well , pip , ” said joe , taking up the poker , and settling himself to his usual occupation when he was thoughtful , of slowly raking the fire between the lower bars ;
“ they don’t mind what they ask of me , the subordinate ;
he may cringe and growl , or cringe and not growl ;
and i got up behind the coach to eat mine , because she told me to .
“ it was you , villain , ” said i .
“ you hadn’t come into your good fortune at that time ?
he wiped himself again , as he had done before , and then slowly took his tangle of tobacco from his pocket , and plucked his pipe from his button-hole , and slowly filled it , and began to smoke .
“ all right , john , all right !
i want to know how you are to be kept out of danger , how long you are going to stay , what projects you have .
it was remarkable (but perhaps the wretched life he had led accounted for it) that he was the least anxious of any of us .
therefore , fearing he should be called upon to depose about this destroyed child , and so be the cause of her death , he hid himself (much as he grieved for the child) , kept himself dark , as he says , out of the way and out of the trial , and was only vaguely talked of as a certain man called abel , out of whom the jealousy arose .
i told you i should be disagreeable .
he turned his eyes on mr jaggers whenever he raised them from the table , and was as dry and distant to me as if there were twin wemmicks , and this was the wrong one .
” piped the old man from within .
“ how well you look !
i was haunted by the file too .
“ you see , blacksmith , ” said the sergeant , who had by this time picked out joe with his eye , “ we have had an accident with these , and i find the lock of one of ’em goes wrong , and the coupling don’t act pretty .
and again , for anything i knew , the proffered information might have some important bearing on the flight itself .
i thought there must really be something more here than i knew ;
when he said , “ who giveth this woman to be married to this man ?
and my life has been a blind and thankless one ;
but i could not submit to be thrown off in that way , and i made a passionate , almost an indignant appeal , to him to be more frank and manly with me .
now i’ll tell you something more , wolf , and this ends it .
“ don’t be afraid of my being a blessing to him , ” said estella ;
but i knew well enough how to shoot’ the bridge after seeing it done , and so began to row about among the shipping in the pool , and down to erith .
also , they stood about the door of the jolly bargemen , with knowing and reserved looks that filled the whole neighbourhood with admiration ;
they’re pretty well known to be out on the marshes still , and they won’t try to get clear of ’em before dusk .
“ now look here my man , ” said mr jaggers , advancing a step , and pointing to the door .
he was throwing his finger at both of us , and i think would have gone on , but for his seeming to think joe dangerous , and going off .
here , in a corner my indentures were duly signed and attested , and i was “ bound ” ;
wednesday being so close upon us , we determined to go back to london that night , three in the post-chaise ;
mr pip , there are about seven hundred thieves in this town who know all about that watch ;
“ yes i am , ” said joe .
“ pip , ” said he , putting his large hand on my shoulder and moving me to the window , “ i don’t know one from the other .
both these heads of information were in a list that magwitch , while in prison , gave to mr jaggers , of the possessions he supposed i should inherit .
when it is summer in the light , and winter in the shade .
i felt my face fire up as i looked at joe .
“ good again !
at the same time , he hugged his shuddering body in both his arms , clasping himself , as if to hold himself together , and limped towards the low church wall .
i thought he would be more glad if i came upon him with his breakfast , in that unexpected manner , so i went forward softly and touched him on the shoulder .
i heard the side-door open , and steps come across the courtyard ;
similarly , i must have my smoke .
“ what have you got there ?
“ of course .
drummle didn’t say much , but in his limited way (he struck me as a sulky kind of fellow) he spoke as one of the elect , and recognised mrs pocket as a woman and a sister .
“ and how are you ?
he was waiting for me with great impatience .
” he retorted , first stretching himself and then shaking himself ;
why have you not begun ?
yes , she had sent for me on a trial visit , and if i had come out of it successfully , i suppose i should have been provided for ;
why ?
he mentioned that there was an opportunity for a great amalgamation and monopoly of the corn and seed trade on those premises , if enlarged , such as had never occurred before in that or any other neighbourhood .
as i drew her down into her chair , i was conscious of a scent that i knew , and turning , saw my guardian in the room .
“ if it warn’t for me you’d have been to the churchyard long ago , and stayed there .
if a pretext to get him away could be made out of that other convict , or out of anything else in his life , now .
waiter !
” the arrival of the body for interment (in an empty black box with the lid tumbling open) , was the signal for a general joy , which was much enhanced by the discovery , among the bearers , of an individual obnoxious to identification .
this is a visitor of mine .
i am paid for undertaking it , and i do so .
i noticed that .
“ yes , ” repeated the stranger , looking round at the rest of the company with his right hand extended towards the witness , wopsle .
and i told him how wemmick had heard , in newgate prison (whether from officers or prisoners i could not say) , that he was under some suspicion , and that my chambers had been watched ;
“ enough house , ” said i ;
other lots were marked off on other parts of the structure , and the ivy had been torn down to make room for the inscriptions , and much of it trailed low in the dust and was withered already .
“ pip , old chap !
i never have been so surprised in my life , as i was when i let out the first blow , and saw him lying on his back , looking up at me with a bloody nose and his face exceedingly fore-shortened .
this may lead to miserable things .
“ well ?
once round ?) and so you are here , pip ?
there he is , you see !
she was nearing us very fast , and the beating of her peddles grew louder and louder .
“ very curious indeed !
it was very aggravating ;
he took his hand from hers , and turned that wrist up on the table .
but when i went up to my little room on this last night , i felt compelled to admit that it might be so , and had an impulse upon me to go down again and entreat joe to walk with me in the morning .
“ do you deceive and entrap him , estella ?
i should have been a dead man if you had not come up .
we drank all the wine , and mr pumblechook pledged himself over and over again to keep joseph up to the mark (i don’t know what mark) , and to render me efficient and constant service (i don’t know what service) .
when joe went home at five minutes before ten , he found her struck down on the floor , and promptly called in assistance .
“ well , ” said joe , meditatively , not , of course , that it could be in anywise necessary to consider about it , but because it was the way at the jolly bargemen to seem to consider deeply about everything that was discussed over pipes , “ well no .
“ mind !
more than that , he seems to me (i may misjudge him) to be a man of a desperate and fierce character .
sometimes he was almost or quite unable to speak , then he would answer me with slight pressures on my hand , and i grew to understand his meaning very well .
another night consultation with herbert after provis was gone home (i always took him home , and always looked well about me) , led us to the conclusion that nothing should be said about going abroad until i came back from miss havisham’s .
we never should have got leave to go , i am sure , but for mrs joe’s curiosity to know all about it and how it ended .
i had never heard joe read aloud to any greater extent than this monosyllable , and i had observed at church last sunday , when i accidentally held our prayer-book upside down , that it seemed to suit his convenience quite as well as if it had been all right .
“ one , two , three , and now i am in for it .
the stranger did not recognise me , but i recognised him as the gentleman i had met on the stairs , on the occasion of my second visit to miss havisham .
“ you are still on friendly terms with mr jaggers ?
compeyson is the man who professed to be miss havisham’s lover .
i had believed in the front door , as a mysterious portal of the temple of state whose solemn opening was attended with a sacrifice of roast fowls ;
in my weakness and entire dependence on him , the dear fellow had fallen into the old tone , and called me by the old names , the dear “ old pip , old chap , ” that now were music in my ears .
it was the worst course i could have taken , because it gave pumblechook the opportunity he wanted .
“ so !
little alick in a frock has already made arrangements for his union with a suitable young person at kew .
that ain’t the way to get out of being common , old chap .
i read with my watch upon the table , purposing to close my book at eleven o’clock .
“ ah !
“ did i ?
“ let go of my coat .
” said he , “ i didn’t care much for it .
she looked all round the room in a glaring manner , and then said , leaning on me while her hand twitched my shoulder , “ come , come , come !
we went on our way upstairs after this episode ;
the sergeant and i were in the kitchen when mrs joe stood staring ;
pursuing my idea as i leaned back in my wooden chair , and looked at biddy sewing away with her head on one side , i began to think her rather an extraordinary girl .
i took it out of the paper , and it proved to be a good one .
it was a run indeed now , and what joe called , in the only two words he spoke all the time , “ a winder .
at length i got out , “ joe , have you told biddy ?
i have got a stewed steak , which is of home preparation , and a cold roast fowl , which is from the cook’s-shop .
in course of time i saw his hand appear on the other side of miss skiffins ;
“ well , pip , ” said he , “ i must call you mr pip to-day .
“ very well ;
it was like her self-forgetfulness to transfer the remark to my sister , and to get up and be busy about her , making her more comfortable ;
“ now you see , joseph and wife , ” said pumblechook , as he took me by the arm above the elbow , “ i am one of them that always go right through with what they’ve begun .
who giveth ?
“ a perfect fleet , ” said he .
“ don’t you think i might say that i did not , joe ?
” pursued my convict .
you will have to go with him , and then he may be induced to go .
yes .
i became imbued with the notion on that first occasion before we sat down to dinner , but i cannot define by what means .
” camilla presently went on (i knew they had all been looking at me in the mean time) , “ he is so very strange !
so that , if by any accident we were not taken abroad , we should have another chance .
and , dear boy , how good looking you have growed !
” asked mrs joe .
“ i beg your pardon , mr jaggers .
herbert probably would have been scratching his head in a most rueful manner at the sight of his accumulating figures .
so don’t tell no more on ’em , pip , and live well and die happy .
” pumblechook was now addressing the landlord , “ and william !
joe felt , as i did , that he had made a point there , and he pulled hard at his pipe to keep himself from weakening it by repetition .
” i remonstrated , for he made no reply at all .
some lawyer , maybe .
“ do you know it , or don’t you know it ?
i prefer not to anticipate my communication here ;
and you read ’em ;
if you don’t know what i mean , you are blind .
now , you are distinctly to understand that you are most positively prohibited from making any inquiry on this head , or any allusion or reference , however distant , to any individual whomsoever as the individual , in all the communications you may have with me .
” said estella , preserving her attitude of indifference as she leaned against the great chimney-piece and only moving her eyes ;
” returned the other .
joe mentioned it now , and the strange man called him by it .
the torches we carried dropped great blotches of fire upon the track , and i could see those , too , lying smoking and flaring .
at first with such discourse , and afterwards with conversation of a more general nature , did mr wemmick and i beguile the time and the road , until he gave me to understand that we had arrived in the district of walworth .
which is it to be ?
mr jaggers nodded .
sometimes , it seemed to stop altogether , and then the soldiers stopped .
ay , ay , old chap !
“ i have dined with him at his private house .
as i cleared , joe cleared , and it seemed as though he had sympathetically arrived at a resolution too .
for , i cannot adequately express what pain it gave me to think that estella should show any favour to a contemptible , clumsy , sulky booby , so very far below the average .
no , no .
the more so as the lord chief justice’s proprietor wore (from his hat down to his boots and up again to his pocket-handkerchief inclusive) mildewed clothes which had evidently not belonged to him originally , and which i took it into my head he had bought cheap of the executioner .
“ i am to write to her constantly and see her regularly and report how i go on , i and the jewels , for they are nearly all mine now .
as i was taking my departure , he asked me if i would like to devote five minutes to seeing mr jaggers “ at it ?
easy , herbert .
consequently , i said as little as i could , and had my face shoved against the kitchen wall .
” said drummle .
and he turned his face to the fire , and spread his hands broader on his knees , and lifted them off and put them on again .
he always slouched , locomotively , with his eyes on the ground ;
i looked at him eagerly when he looked at me , and slightly moved my hands and shook my head .
“ do you know what is become of orlick ?
when she was dead , i apprehend he first told his daughter what he had done , and then the son became a part of the family , residing in the house you are acquainted with .
the moment he succeeded , he came over to me (breathing sherry and crumbs) , and said in a subdued voice , “ may i , dear sir ?
“ i work pretty hard for a sufficient living , and therefore yes , i do well .
“ squires of the boar !
if the green and yellow growth of weed in the chinks of the old wall had been the most precious flowers that ever blew , it could not have been more cherished in my remembrance .
that’s how he looked when we were tried together .
he never smoked so late , and it seemed to hint to me that he wanted comforting , for some reason or other .
but i feel that i have to screw myself up when i dine with him , and i dine more comfortably unscrewed .
i’ll pull him down , like a bloodhound .
that’s what she did , ” said joe , slowly clearing the fire between the lower bars with the poker , and looking at it ;
he always carried (i have not yet mentioned it , i think) a pocket-handkerchief of rich silk and of imposing proportions , which was of great value to him in his profession .
this , however , was a mere question of length and wearisomeness .
very regular in everything , is my son .
“ now , do it look like it ?
“ i’d do that , if i was going to be strung up to that there gallows as there is over there , directly afterwards .
and the sky was just a row of long angry red lines and dense black lines intermixed .
what could i do but follow him ?
“ at least ?
“ i think i shall trade , also , ” said he , putting his thumbs in his waist-coat pockets , “ to the west indies , for sugar , tobacco , and rum .
the governor stepped aside , and beckoned the officer away .
wild as my inward hurry was , and wonderful the force of the pictures that rushed by me instead of thoughts , i could yet clearly understand that , unless he had resolved that i was within a few moments of surely perishing out of all human knowledge , he would never have told me what he had told .
i was going to retort with an inquiry , and had got as far as “ why ” when joe stopped me .
so i begun wi’ compeyson , and a poor tool i was in his hands .
but , in the funereal room , with that figure of the grave fallen back in the chair fixing its eyes upon her , estella looked more bright and beautiful than before , and i was under stronger enchantment .
“ i want , ” she said , “ to pursue that subject you mentioned to me when you were last here , and to show you that i am not all stone .
here it is .
now , your inclinations are to be consulted .
he was still sweeping when i came out into the shop with mr trabb , and he knocked the broom against all possible corners and obstacles , to express (as i understood it) equality with any blacksmith , alive or dead .
” upon this we all took courage to unite in a confirmatory murmur .
i have given out that you are my uncle .
with a clink for the stout old clem !
“ such a mean brute , such a stupid brute !
“ right !
“ dear boy , ” he returned , “ there’s disguising wigs can be bought for money , and there’s hair powder , and spectacles , and black clothes , shorts and what not .
“ it were but lonesome then , ” said joe , “ living here alone , and i got acquainted with your sister .
this is kind !
i looked at those hands , i looked at those eyes , i looked at that flowing hair ;
“ and why did i do it , i should like to know ?
“ i have found out who my patron is .
if you’re ready , his majesty the king is .
the second or third time as ever i see him , he come a tearing down into compeyson’s parlour late at night , in only a flannel gown , with his hair all in a sweat , and he says to compeyson’s wife , sally , she really is upstairs alonger me , now , and i can’t get rid of her .
even though i was so wretched in having him at large and near me , and even though i would far rather have worked at the forge all the days of my life than i would ever have come to this !
” said mr jaggers .
herbert crossed his feet , looked at the fire with his head on one side , and having looked at it in vain for some time , looked at me because i didn’t go on .
you shall show money with lords for wagers , and beat ’em !
in the same moment , i saw the steersman of the galley lay his hand on his prisoner’s shoulder , and saw that both boats were swinging round with the force of the tide , and saw that all hands on board the steamer were running forward quite frantically .
” i asked the coachman .
do you often come back ?
a diamond all set round with rubies ;
i entered and he swung it , and locked it , and took the key out .
t’other , the elder , always seen in ’em and always wi’ his guilt brought home .
don’t be afraid of it !
no one else taking any .
your poor sister is much the same as when you left .
no !
it’s himself , you know .
“ get out of this office .
i thought , “ yet joe , dear joe , you never tell of it .
“ did you ever see her in it , uncle ?
the last hamlet as i dressed , made the same mistakes in his reading at rehearsal , till i got him to put a large red wafer on each of his shins , and then at that rehearsal (which was the last) i went in front , sir , to the back of the pit , and whenever his reading brought him into profile , i called out “ i don’t see no wafers !
” said provis coming forward , with his little clasped black book , and then addressing himself to herbert .
i invited wemmick to come upstairs , and refresh himself with a glass of grog before walking to walworth .
“ what is the debt ?
“ lord bless me , you’re the prowling boy !
which was so effectually done (the swab family having considerable political influence) that it took half the evening to set things right , and then it was only brought about through an honest little grocer with a white hat , black gaiters , and red nose , getting into a clock , with a gridiron , and listening , and coming out , and knocking everybody down from behind with the gridiron whom he couldn’t confute with what he had overheard .
the late king of the country not only appeared to have been troubled with a cough at the time of his decease , but to have taken it with him to the tomb , and to have brought it back .
“ then , herbert , ” i would respond , “ let us look into our affairs .
eh , mr wopsle ?
“ come !
that , rather late in the evening mr wopsle gave us collins’s ode , and threw his bloodstained sword in thunder down , with such effect , that a waiter came in and said , “ the commercials underneath sent up their compliments , and it wasn’t the tumblers’ arms .
i’m going to take a liberty with you .
“ oh !
o , you must take the purse !
standing as he did speechless , with his tuft of feathers ruffled , and his mouth open as if he wanted a worm .
“ oh !
if you complain of me i shall get into trouble with my sister , so i would do it if i could ;
please god , i will be as true to you as you have been to me !
put your question .
but he punished the amens tremendously ;
first , over yonder ;
“ i thought and hoped you could not mean it .
i was thus enabled to fly from the blue boar immediately after breakfast .
i wonder you know me .
i showed her to a nicety where i had seen her walking on the casks , that first old day , and she said , with a cold and careless look in that direction , “ did i ?
still in the same moment , i saw that the face disclosed , was the face of the other convict of long ago .
my left arm , though it presented no bad symptoms , took , in the natural course , so long to heal that i was still unable to get a coat on .
“ you are expected on board , ” said the sergeant to my convict ;
” said she , looking at the discomfited and envious sarah , with delight .
some ancient trees before the house were still cut into fashions as formal and unnatural as the hoops and wigs and stiff skirts ;
miss havisham glanced at him as if she understood what he really was better than i had thought possible , seeing what he was there ;
“ what do you play , boy ?
“ how dare you ?
the event that had begun to be prepared for , before i knew that the world held estella , and in the days when her baby intelligence was receiving its first distortions from miss havisham’s wasting hands .
it will presently be seen that the question was not before me in a distinct shape until it was put before me by a wiser head than my own .
the marshes were just a long black horizontal line then , as i stopped to look after him ;
“ i bought them .
whoever was below had stopped on seeing my lamp , for all was quiet .
“ i have been thrown among one family of your relations , miss havisham , and have been constantly among them since i went to london .
hold up your head , boy , and be forever grateful unto them which so did do .
“ who else ?
conscience is a dreadful thing when it accuses man or boy ;
and as miss havisham dwelt upon this roll , with the intensity of a mind mortally hurt and diseased , she sat with her other hand on her crutch stick , and her chin on that , and her wan bright eyes glaring at me , a very spectre .
you have never told me when you have got your hair cut , but i have had senses to perceive it .
do you make that of it ?
” said the strange man .
“ is she beautiful , graceful , well-grown ?
out of such remembrances i brought into the light of the fire a half-formed terror that it might not be safe to be shut up there with him in the dead of the wild solitary night .
at first , i meant no more .
i can’t say which .
not for smith’s work in general , and for you !
he had struck root in joe’s establishment , by reason of my sister’s sudden fancy for him , or i should have tried to get him dismissed .
“ you are right , ” said drummle .
this reply seemed agreeable to mr jaggers , who said , “ i thought so !
“ but get him where i will , could i prevent his coming back ?
now , don’t you ?
i saw mr pumblechook balance his knife .
whatever i acquired , i tried to impart to joe .
he did not turn me upside down this time to get at what i had , but left me right side upwards while i opened the bundle and emptied my pockets .
i wonder you condescend to come back to such poor society as this , i am sure i do !
when i awoke without having parted in my sleep with the perception of my wretchedness , the clocks of the eastward churches were striking five , the candles were wasted out , the fire was dead , and the wind and rain intensified the thick black darkness .
let him suppose it a mere freak , but a secret one , until the morning comes :
and as to the condition on which you hold your advancement in life , namely , that you are not to inquire or discuss to whom you owe it , you may be very sure that it will never be encroached upon , or even approached , by me , or by any one belonging to me .
” and then , “ take the pencil and write under my name , i forgive her !’ ” she never changed the order of these three sentences , but she sometimes left out a word in one or other of them ;
“ what do you mean ?
” and i was so aggravated that i almost doubt if i did know .
“ i had forgotten that , herbert , but i remember it now you speak of it .
“ if that is all you have to say , sir , ” i remarked , “ there can be nothing left for me to say .
“ you would never marry him , estella ?
mr jaggers had seen me with estella , and was not likely to have missed the sentiments i had been at no pains to conceal .
miss sarah pocket came to the gate .
heavy in figure , movement , and comprehension , in the sluggish complexion of his face , and in the large , awkward tongue that seemed to loll about in his mouth as he himself lolled about in a room , he was idle , proud , niggardly , reserved , and suspicious .
“ yah !
the sergeant tossed off his glass again and seemed quite ready for another glass .
when i woke up in the night , like camilla , i used to think , with a weariness on my spirits , that i should have been happier and better if i had never seen miss havisham’s face , and had risen to manhood content to be partners with joe in the honest old forge .
sometimes , she would tell me energetically that she hated me .
“ no , ” i returned ;
i might have been an unfortunate little bull in a spanish arena , i got so smartingly touched up by these moral goads .
then she softly patted my shoulder in a soothing way , while with my face upon my sleeve i cried a little , exactly as i had done in the brewery yard , and felt vaguely convinced that i was very much ill-used by somebody , or by everybody ;
“ ah !
“ what !
and it was from the talk of some of his people in trouble (some of his people being always in trouble) that i heard what i did .
“ herbert , ” said i , after a short silence , in a hurried way , “ can you see me best by the light of the window , or the light of the fire ?
” said i .
“ you did , ” said wemmick .
“ i know that what is said between you and me goes no further .
we were noticing this , and saying how that the mist rose with a change of wind from a certain quarter of our marshes , when we came upon a man , slouching under the lee of the turnpike house .
again , the only other man who dwelt in the house of which my chambers formed a part had been in the country for some weeks , and he certainly had not returned in the night , because we had seen his door with his seal on it as we came upstairs .
” said he , facing round , after doggedly preceding me a few steps towards the house .
pray let me take these bags from you .
on the saturday in that same week , i took my leave of herbert , full of bright hope , but sad and sorry to leave me , as he sat on one of the seaport mail coaches .
“ thankee , my boy .
however , my determined manner would have its effect , and herbert would fall to work again .
but i knew there was a coach from your part of the country at midday , and i thought you would come by that one .
only twice more did the housekeeper reappear , and then her stay in the room was very short , and mr jaggers was sharp with her .
“ this , ” said she , pointing to the long table with her stick , “ is where i will be laid when i am dead .
on the contrary , i saw him next moment , once more holding out both his hands to me .
by degrees , wemmick got dryer and harder as we went along , and his mouth tightened into a post-office again .
herbert had told me on former occasions , and now reminded me , that he first knew miss clara barley when she was completing her education at an establishment at hammersmith , and that on her being recalled home to nurse her father , he and she had confided their affection to the motherly mrs whimple , by whom it had been fostered and regulated with equal kindness and discretion , ever since .
anyhow , i sat with my elbow on my knee and my face upon my hand , looking into the fire , as those two talked about my going away , and about what they should do without me , and all that .
lord !
then i put the fastenings as i had found them , opened the door at which i had entered when i ran home last night , shut it , and ran for the misty marshes .
but , before we went to bed , i had resolved that i would wait over to-morrow , to-morrow being sunday , and would begin my new course with the new week .
” cried mr pocket , in an outbreak of desolate desperation .
mean to say he knowed nothing of you ?
” when we were in a side alley , he turned and asked , “ how did you think he looked ?
lastly , ophelia was a prey to such slow musical madness , that when , in course of time , she had taken off her white muslin scarf , folded it up , and buried it , a sulky man who had been long cooling his impatient nose against an iron bar in the front row of the gallery , growled , “ now the baby’s put to bed let’s have supper !
when i go into the office , i leave the castle behind me , and when i come into the castle , i leave the office behind me .
her father privately married again his cook , i rather think .
o , she’s gone !
the fire had not then burnt unusually low , nor was the snuff of the candle very long ;
“ don’t commit yourself , ” said mr jaggers , “ and don’t commit any one .
“ you little coarse monster , what do you think of me now ?
“ what put that in your head ?
“ if miss havisham wished to see me , ” returned mr pumblechook , discomfited .
no wisdom on earth could have given me the comfort that i should have derived from their simplicity and fidelity ;
i caught at the name directly .
and in the country , trees had been torn up , and sails of windmills carried away ;
“ quite .
preserving her unmoved countenance , and with her fingers still going , estella shook her head .
” she wrung her hands , and crushed her white hair , and returned to this cry over and over again .
“ would you mind handel for a familiar name ?
next day the clothes i had ordered all came home , and he put them on .
it is done .
on the contrary , she seemed to prefer my being ignorant .
are you aware , or are you not aware , that none of these witnesses have yet been cross-examined ?
“ miss havisham was good enough to ask me , ” i returned , “ whether she could do nothing for me , and i told her no .
“ god knows you’re welcome to it , so far as it was ever mine , ” returned joe , with a saving remembrance of mrs joe .
but he was often talked at , while they were in progress , by reason of mrs joe’s perceiving that he was not favourable to my being taken from the forge .
“ in a general way , anythink .
they had pulled one sudden stroke ahead , had got their oars in , had run athwart us , and were holding on to our gunwale , before we knew what they were doing .
i beat the prison dust off my feet as i sauntered to and fro , and i shook it out of my dress , and i exhaled its air from my lungs .
“ o dear no , sir , ” said mr wopsle , “ not drunk .
that’ll be my pleasure .
come back from botany bay ;
as to the first letter of that lawyer’s name now .
was there ever such a boy as this !
didn’t it ?
but our boat was gone , and the two convicts were gone .
“ yes .
“ it serves you right , ” said wemmick , “ get out .
whether i really had been down in garden court in the dead of the night , groping about for the boat that i supposed to be there ;
“ but how much would you tell him , herbert ?
when i had been in mr pocket’s family a month or two , mr and mrs camilla turned up .
of course , i was perfectly sure and safe that provis had not been there .
what possessed you ?
after our early dinner , i strolled out alone , purposing to finish off the marshes at once , and get them done with .
“ i tell you it was your doing , i tell you it was done through you , ” he retorted , catching up the gun , and making a blow with the stock at the vacant air between us .
many pleasant pictures of the life that i would lead there , and of the change for the better that would come over my character when i had a guiding spirit at my side whose simple faith and clear home wisdom i had proved , beguiled my way .
i wish you well and happy !
and it’s run through my fingers and gone , you see !
well !
i had thought about that , while we had been there side by side .
” said he .
at last we went back into the house , and there i heard , with surprise , that my guardian had come down to see miss havisham on business , and would come back to dinner .
here !
“ i want to know no more than i know .
so now , as an infallible way of making little ease great ease , i began to contract a quantity of debt .
“ it’s my wedding-day !
perhaps you know it’s provis ?
i had been afraid until then to say a word about the play .
“ i am to come to london the day after to-morrow by the midday coach .
“ i do indeed , joe .
“ we say these are not marks of finger-nails , but marks of brambles , and we show you the brambles .
i noticed that mr pumblechook in his hospitality appeared to forget that he had made a present of the wine , but took the bottle from mrs joe and had all the credit of handing it about in a gush of joviality .
“ you’re right , ” said wemmick ;
clara returned soon afterwards , and herbert accompanied me upstairs to see our charge .
but the black beetles took no notice of the agitation , and groped about the hearth in a ponderous elderly way , as if they were short-sighted and hard of hearing , and not on terms with one another .
but i reflected that perhaps freedom without danger was too much apart from all the habit of his existence to be to him what it would be to another man .
no , ” returned the stranger , “ but once and away , and on a saturday night too .
” he growled , “ where are you two going ?
it was visiting time when wemmick took me in , and a potman was going his rounds with beer ;
the garden was too overgrown and rank for walking in with ease , and after we had made the round of it twice or thrice , we came out again into the brewery yard .
of that group i was one .
“ did i not see her with my own eyes and hear her with my own ears , come into the room just now and ask to speak to you ?
“ astonishing !
“ no , to be sure .
“ come , come !
the whole village was there , or in the yard ;
it is not wholly irrespective of our personal feelings that we record him as the mentor of our young telemachus , for it is good to know that our town produced the founder of the latter’s fortunes .
it induced me to hope that miss havisham meant us for one another .
“ which some individual , ” joe again politely hinted , “ mentioned that she wanted him to go and play there .
“ this is an authority to him to pay you that money , to lay out at your irresponsible discretion for your friend .
she was not physically strong , and after a little time said , “ slower !
horses to ride , and horses to drive , and horses for his servant to ride and drive as well .
but i hope it had some dregs of good at the bottom of it .
“ yes , ” i returned ;
“ pip , ma’am .
” said mr jaggers .
” therefore , i naturally pointed to mrs joe , and put my mouth into the form of saying , “ her ?
for i called to mind now , that she was equally accomplished in the terms of our trade , and the names of our different sorts of work , and our various tools .
another clerk was rung down from upstairs to take his place while he was out , and i accompanied him into the street , after shaking hands with my guardian .
and to sleep long and sound , ” he answered ;
“ take nothing on its looks ;
disfigured , but fairly serviceable .
when i was first hired out as shepherd t’other side the world , it’s my belief i should ha’ turned into a molloncolly-mad sheep myself , if i hadn’t a had my smoke .
i remember mrs hubble as a little curly sharp-edged person in sky-blue , who held a conventionally juvenile position , because she had married mr hubble , i don’t know at what remote period , when she was much younger than he .
“ and don’t blame me , ” growled the convict i had recognised .
“ it will take a little time .
“ a pleasure’s a pleasure all the world over .
they would make such a business of it , such a coarse and common business , that i couldn’t bear myself .
you have always adored her , ever since i have known you .
in my dreadful situation , it was a relief when he was brought back , and surveying the company all round as if they had disagreed with him , sank down into his chair with the one significant gasp , “ tar !
“ not necessary , ” said i .
“ which it were , ” said joe , “ that how you might be amongst strangers , and that how you and me having been ever friends , a wisit at such a moment might not prove unacceptabobble .
unless he wants to get rid of the friend , and then it becomes a question how much portable property it may be worth to get rid of him .
miss havisham , if you would spare the money to do my friend herbert a lasting service in life , but which from the nature of the case must be done without his knowledge , i could show you how .
“ all , ” joe repeated , very emphatically .
i stopped for a moment to consider whether there really was this mixture in my character .
now burn .
let me confess exactly with what feelings i looked forward to joe’s coming .
“ not yet .
and that the small bundle of shivers growing afraid of it all and beginning to cry , was pip .
you can put them to some other poor boy’s use .
and thus , although i was assured that i had risen in clara’s esteem , and although the young lady and i had long regularly interchanged messages and remembrances by herbert , i had never seen her .
i thought i saw him leer in an ugly way at me while the decanters were going round , but as there was no love lost between us , that might easily be .
” he said with a tearful smile that it was a singular thing to think of now , and i said so too .
“ i was sent for life .
that’s real enough .
they came in again without finding anything , and then we struck out on the open marshes , through the gate at the side of the churchyard .
there had been shrieks from among the women convicts ;
joe offered no answer , poor fellow , but stood feeling his whisker and looking dejectedly at me , as if he thought it really might have been a better speculation .
i had sadly broken sleep when i got to bed , through thinking of the strange man taking aim at me with his invisible gun , and of the guiltily coarse and common thing it was , to be on secret terms of conspiracy with convicts , a feature in my low career that i had previously forgotten .
“ she has never allowed herself to be seen doing either , since she lived this present life of hers .
” growled the journeyman , between his teeth , “ i’d hold you , if you was my wife .
when the gate was closed upon me by sarah of the walnut-shell countenance , i felt more than ever dissatisfied with my home and with my trade and with everything ;
when we had fortified ourselves with the rum and milk and biscuits , and were going out for the walk with that training preparation on us , i was considerably surprised to see wemmick take up a fishing-rod , and put it over his shoulder .
i took the tablets from her hand , and it trembled again , and it trembled more as she took off the chain to which the pencil was attached , and put it in mine .
to that she emphatically said “ god forbid !
if the wind and the rain had driven away the intervening years , had scattered all the intervening objects , had swept us to the churchyard where we first stood face to face on such different levels , i could not have known my convict more distinctly than i knew him now as he sat in the chair before the fire .
by this time , my sister was quite desperate , so she pounced on joe , and , taking him by the two whiskers , knocked his head for a little while against the wall behind him , while i sat in the corner , looking guiltily on .
but , except these things , and the shudder of the dying day in every blade of grass , there was no break in the bleak stillness of the marshes .
“ not a bit of it , ” returned wemmick , growing bolder and bolder .
here’s the address .
“ oh lord !
when he had at last done and had appointed to send the articles to mr pumblechook’s on the thursday evening , he said , with his hand upon the parlour lock , “ i know , sir , that london gentlemen cannot be expected to patronise local work , as a rule ;
” said joe , after coughing behind his hand , as if he had had time to catch the whooping-cough since he came .
“ how could i do otherwise !
“ they shall be yourn , dear boy , if money can buy ’em .
would gargery come here with you , and bring your indentures , do you think ?
then came that singular calm and silence which succeed all uproars ;
“ pint out the place !
“ i think you would always improve , biddy , under any circumstances .
i soon contracted expensive habits , and began to spend an amount of money that within a few short months i should have thought almost fabulous ;
“ i wish you would tell me her story .
no need to take a file from his pocket and show it to me ;
as the question had no bearing , near or remote , on any foregone or subsequent transaction , i consider it to have been thrown out , like her previous approaches , in general conversational condescension .
the sound of our pens going refreshed us exceedingly , insomuch that i sometimes found it difficult to distinguish between this edifying business proceeding and actually paying the money .
as he wanted the candles close to him , and as he was always on the verge of putting either his head or the newspaper into them , he required as much watching as a powder-mill .
then why didn’t you say so at first ?
bless you .
when the tragedy was over , and he had been called for and hooted , i said to herbert , “ let us go at once , or perhaps we shall meet him .
“ on-common .
as i never saw my father or my mother , and never saw any likeness of either of them (for their days were long before the days of photographs) , my first fancies regarding what they were like were unreasonably derived from their tombstones .
“ stop half a moment , mr gargery , ” said the strange man .
curse this iron on my sore leg !
” said i , shaking hands with him as we turned down the street together .
chapter xxviii .
i knew he would be worse by and by .
the action of her fingers was like the action of knitting .
” she asked me again , with her witch-like eagerness , even in estella’s hearing .
“ why , of course !
but nothing more .
it’s a weakness to be so affectionate , but i can’t help it .
“ ah !
those , uncertain and unpunctual .
but whether joe knew how poor i was , and how my great expectations had all dissolved , like our own marsh mists before the sun , i could not understand .
“ none , ” said he .
“ ever since he was no height at all .
and then , with the vague sensation which i have always connected with such a lull , namely , that it was sunday , and somebody was dead , i went upstairs to dress myself .
“ what do you think of my meaning to take a holiday on monday , mr pip ?
whatever he put on , became him less (it dismally seemed to me) than what he had worn before .
” equally in his stopping at the bars and attending to anxious whisperers , always singly , wemmick with his post-office in an immovable state , looked at them while in conference , as if he were taking particular notice of the advance they had made , since last observed , towards coming out in full blow at their trial .
he’d have their lives , and the lives of scores of ’em .
” cried biddy , with an exultant face .
chapter xlvi .
come !
you’ve never deserted me , dear boy .
“ hundred and twenty-three pound , fifteen , six .
i don’t tell it you on information received .
“ time’s up , ” said wemmick , “ and i must be off .
“ you have nothing more to say to me to-night ?
if you want a subject , look at pork !
“ it is a curious place .
never clapped eyes upon her !
chapter xxiv .
after a little show of indecision , which there were none to see but the two or three amphibious creatures belonging to our temple stairs , we went on board and cast off ;
waterloo , four ;
i’ve no more notion where i was born than you have if so much .
“ no doubt , no doubt .
true , i had no avenger in my service now , but i was looked after by an inflammatory old female , assisted by an animated rag-bag whom she called her niece , and to keep a room secret from them would be to invite curiosity and exaggeration .
mrs joe made occasional trips with uncle pumblechook on market-days , to assist him in buying such household stuffs and goods as required a woman’s judgment ;
” said estella , opening her hands .
as he said so , he got up from table , and putting his hand into the breast of the pea-coat he wore , brought out a short black pipe , and a handful of loose tobacco of the kind that is called negro-head .
i acquiesced , of course , knowing nothing to the contrary .
i stopped , and he came up breathless .
he grasped them heartily , raised them to his lips , kissed them , and still held them .
biddy was much against his going with us , and said to me in a whisper , “ don’t let him come ;
“ how do you manage , biddy , ” said i , “ to learn everything that i learn , and always to keep up with me ?
“ i says , i hope it may be so .
this will pass in no time .
whenever he looked at us , we all expressed the greatest interest and amazement , and nodded until he resumed again .
” joe put his mouth into the forms of returning such a highly elaborate answer , that i could make out nothing of it but the single word “ pip .
folding his arms tight on his chest and applying the screw .
for a moment , with the fear of my sister’s working me before my eyes , i had a desperate idea of starting round the room in the assumed character of mr pumblechook’s chaise-cart .
“ they are very slight , poor thing .
“ i hope to hear you say so , my dear boy .
” i was surprised into crooning this ditty as i pushed her over the floor .
i thanked him , and apologised .
i really thought he was still speaking of the fowl , until he added , “ because i have got an aged parent at my place .
i started much more naturally then , to find myself confronted by a man in a sober grey dress .
she held it in one hand now , and with the other lightly touched my shoulder as we walked .
“ here’s mike , ” said the clerk , getting down from his stool , and approaching mr jaggers confidentially .
those attractions in it , i had seen before ;
“ has she been gone long , joe ?
he gave joe good-night , and he gave mr wopsle good-night (who went out with us) , and he gave me only a look with his aiming eye , no , not a look , for he shut it up , but wonders may be done with an eye by hiding it .
while miss skiffins brewed such a jorum of tea , that the pig in the back premises became strongly excited , and repeatedly expressed his desire to participate in the entertainment .
o the sense of distance and disparity that came upon me , and the inaccessibility that came about her !
“ what else ?
“ and the profits are large ?
” i asked , starting ;
while i thought you could not help yourself , as it were , i refrained from saying it .
” said herbert pocket .
“ what is he now ?
chapter xxxix .
my back was turned towards the distant hulks as i walked on , and , though i could see the old lights away on the spits of sand , i saw them over my shoulder .
joe made the fire and swept the hearth , and then we went to the door to listen for the chaise-cart .
nobody doubted it ;
nor yet we can’t no more hold their tide than i can hold this .
every christmas day he presented himself , as a profound novelty , with exactly the same words , and carrying the two bottles like dumb-bells .
“ you know what i am , don’t you ?
you do it , and you never dare to say a word or dare to make a sign concerning your having seen such a person as me , or any person sumever , and you shall be let to live .
“ they fell into deeper shame and degradation if there can be deeper and ruin .
“ did you notice anything in him ?
we sat in the dreamy room among the old strange influences which had so wrought upon me , and i learnt that she had but just come home from france , and that she was going to london .
not making the least account of “ the one with the delicate face , ” he returned , “ bentley drummle is his name , is it ?
” said the sergeant , “ they’ll find themselves trapped in a circle , i expect , sooner than they count on .
when i got back to my breakfast in the boar’s coffee-room , i found mr pumblechook conversing with the landlord .
“ don’t suppose that i mean to be unkind , biddy , when i say i consider that you ought to have thought that .
“ i’ll tell you .
i didn’t know there had been any .
at all events miss havisham has that impression , and i write in obedience to it .
nobody had come out at the gate with us , nobody went in at the gate with me .
“ yes , sir .
when the rain came with it and dashed against the windows , i thought , raising my eyes to them as they rocked , that i might have fancied myself in a storm-beaten lighthouse .
“ a custom ’us officer knows what to do with his buttons , ” said the jack , repeating the obnoxious word with the greatest contempt , “ when they comes betwixt him and his own light .
the way shall be prepared for you , and you can see his son first , who is in london .
of course i knew better than to offer to see miss skiffins home , and under the circumstances i thought i had best go first ;
and at last he flung out in his violent way , and said , with a d , then do as you like .’ thank goodness it will always be a consolation to me to know that i instantly went out in a pouring rain and bought the things .
the mother set up for frivolity , and the daughter for theology .
” i thought he never would have done wiping his feet , and that i must have gone out to lift him off the mat , but at last he came in .
” and others , “ he’s a young ’un , too , but looks bad , don’t he ?
i told him .
“ bless your soul and body , no , ” answered wemmick , very drily .
another sable warder (a carpenter , who had once eaten two geese for a wager) opened the door , and showed me into the best parlour .
and for the same reason i recommended that , even if you came back last night , you should not go home .
“ but has she not taken me downstairs , belinda , ” returned mr pocket , “ and shown me the woman , and the bundle too ?
“ i never told you .
quite overpowered by the magnificence of these transactions , i asked him where the ships he insured mostly traded to at present ?
and a travelling giant what signed his name at a penny a time learnt me to write .
you shall have some eggs , and judge for yourself .
mr trabb never removed his stern eye from the boy until he had deposited number four on the counter and was at a safe distance again .
” she cried , picking up the pocket-handkerchief , “ if that don’t make seven times !
while he , looming dark and heavy in the shadow of a corner by the window , looked like the human dormouse for whom it was fitted up , as indeed he was .
it was not until i became third in the firm , that clarriker betrayed me to herbert ;
“ good-bye , pip !
she had shown a proud impatience more than once before , and had rather endured that fierce affection than accepted or returned it .
don’t you ?
“ did you observe , gentlemen , ” said mr waldengarver , “ that there was a man in the gallery who endeavoured to cast derision on the service , i mean , the representation ?
“ i am not acquainted with this country , gentlemen , but it seems a solitary country towards the river .
and mr jaggers made not me alone intensely melancholy , because , after he was gone , herbert said of himself , with his eyes fixed on the fire , that he thought he must have committed a felony and forgotten the details of it , he felt so dejected and guilty .
you must have his room .
“ put the case that the child grew up , and was married for money .
“ and yet when he went from here (i may say with my blessing) , and i spread afore him my humble store , like the bee , he was as plump as a peach !
indeed , i go so far as to hope that i regarded myself while dressing as a species of savage young wolf or other wild beast .
yet estella was so inseparable from all my restlessness and disquiet of mind , that i really fell into confusion as to the limits of my own part in its production .
the upshot was , that we found a worthy young merchant or shipping-broker , not long established in business , who wanted intelligent help , and who wanted capital , and who in due course of time and receipt would want a partner .
and it was an uneasy bed now , and i never slept the old sound sleep in it any more .
the late compeyson having been beforehand with him in intelligence of his return , and being so determined to bring him to book , i do not think he could have been saved .
the change , though it was made without noise , drew back the film from the placid look at the white ceiling , and he looked most affectionately at me .
god bless you !
i don’t know that .
mr trabb’s boy was the most audacious boy in all that country-side .
i soon fell asleep before wemmick’s fire , and the aged and i enjoyed one another’s society by falling asleep before it more or less all day .
i was fully old enough now to be apprenticed to joe ;
to the best of my belief , our case was in the last aspect a rather common one .
in the moment when i was withdrawing my head to go quietly away , i saw a great flaming light spring up .
and i saw in this , the distinct shadow of the darkened and unhealthy house in which her life was hidden from the sun .
“ i saw him there , on the night she died .
“ march .
he looked about him with the strangest air , an air of wondering pleasure , as if he had some part in the things he admired , and he pulled off a rough outer coat , and his hat .
give me your fork , mum , and take the baby , ” said flopson .
“ but i don’t mean in that form , sir , ” returned mr pumblechook , who had an objection to being interrupted ;
but my view was suddenly stopped by the closed shutters within , and all was lifeless .
“ at the hour and minute , ” said herbert , nodding , “ at which she afterwards stopped all the clocks .
it was obviously made with the assurance that he could not live so long , and was refused .
i hunted him down .
“ do you ?
this gradually led to a want of toleration for him , and even on his being detected in holy orders , and declining to perform the funeral service to the general indignation taking the form of nuts .
i’ve had a firm mind and a firm will to have your life , since you was down here at your sister’s burying .
waking , i never lost that fear .
“ but i am not a fortune-teller , ” he said , letting his head drop into a festoon of towel , and towelling away at his two ears .
by the time she had been hailed and stopped , both steamers were drifting away from us , and we were rising and falling in a troubled wake of water .
i had never dreamed of joe’s having paid the money ;
” cried the stranger , calling to the landlord .
but i am glad to know that i never breathed a murmur to joe while my indentures lasted .
but herbert’s was a very different case , and it often caused me a twinge to think that i had done him evil service in crowding his sparely furnished chambers with incongruous upholstery work , and placing the canary-breasted avenger at his disposal .
“ why do you , a stranger coming into my rooms at this time of the night , ask that question ?
“ you’re a game one , ” he returned , shaking his head at me with a deliberate affection , at once most unintelligible and most exasperating ;
“ but i’ll tell you one thing , mr waldengarver , ” said the man who was on his knees , “ in which you’re out in your reading .
but joe was readier with his definition than i had expected , and completely stopped me by arguing circularly , and answering with a fixed look , “ her .
be just to me .
afterwards she kept her hands there for a little while , and slowly took them away as if they were heavy .
we ordered something rather special for dinner , with a bottle of something similarly out of the common way , in order that our minds might be fortified for the occasion , and we might come well up to the mark .
“ it was going by post , when you brought mr pip into the office .
i was passing out without looking at her , when she touched me with a taunting hand .
“ is she , uncle ?
“ if there was anything deeper , ” added wemmick , bringing his pen to paper , “ he’d be it .
“ very easily said !
the soldiers were moving on in the direction of the old battery , and we were moving on a little way behind them , when , all of a sudden , we all stopped .
on our coming in by and by , she said , i should wheel her about a little , as in times of yore .
“ recollect the admission you have made , and don’t try to go from it presently .
i believe he had been knighted himself for storming the english grammar at the point of the pen , in a desperate address engrossed on vellum , on the occasion of the laying of the first stone of some building or other , and for handing some royal personage either the trowel or the mortar .
i laughed in spite of myself all the time , the whole thing was so droll ;
hence , the regularly recurring spaces of our separation were long enough to record on his face any slight changes that occurred in his physical state .
“ yes , pip , dear boy , i’ve made a gentleman on you !
after well considering the matter while i was dressing at the blue boar in the morning , i resolved to tell my guardian that i doubted orlick’s being the right sort of man to fill a post of trust at miss havisham’s .
but , throughout the interview , joe persisted in addressing me instead of miss havisham .
i said to herbert , meanwhile , that even if provis were recognised and taken , in spite of himself , i should be wretched as the cause , however innocently .
you needn’t bring any , william .
, and its contents were simply , that i was an honoured sir , and that they begged to inform me that mrs j .
“ ask one , ” said mr jaggers .
but i sat wondering and waiting in mr jaggers’s close room , until i really could not bear the two casts on the shelf above mr jaggers’s chair , and got up and went out .
when i had got all my responsibilities down upon my list , i compared each with the bill , and ticked it off .
which the playacting have likeways brought him to london along with me .
“ think of him !
but the old boy was so far from responding , that he would not even walk to hammersmith on the same side of the way ;
though i doubt if he were quite as fully sensible of that gentleman’s merits under arid conditions , as when something moist was going .
i had never seen them on such ill terms ;
when at last i put the glass to him , i saw with amazement that his eyes were full of tears .
sometimes , she would coldly tolerate me ;
“ handel , ” said herbert , stopping , “ you feel convinced that you can take no further benefits from him ;
an obliging stranger , under pretence of compactly folding up my bank-notes for security’s sake , abstracts the notes and gives me nutshells ;
her relations were poor and scheming , with the exception of my father ;
” estella asked me .
i am disgusted with my calling and with my life .
at night , when i had gone to bed , joe came into my room , as he had done all through my recovery .
i thus became aware of the mutual relations between them and mr pocket , which were exemplified in the following manner .
“ not that anybody means to try , ” she added , “ for that’s all done with , and the place will stand as idle as it is till it falls .
i answered with a constraint i made no attempt to disguise , that i had seen mr jaggers in miss havisham’s house on the very day of our combat , but never at any other time , and that i believed he had no recollection of having ever seen me there .
then , all the children laughed , and mr pocket (who in the meantime had twice endeavoured to lift himself up by the hair) laughed , and we all laughed and were glad .
and in my sleep i saw the file coming at me out of a door , without seeing who held it , and i screamed myself awake .
what i look at is the sacrifice of so much portable property .
” the crying woman pleaded .
whom the father believed dead , and dared make no stir about ;
” asked biddy .
still , look’ee here , pip .
his words had given me a start .
she manifested the greatest anxiety to be on good terms with him , was evidently much pleased by his being at length produced , and motioned that she would have him given something to drink .
“ now , follow that passage with your eye , and tell me whether it distinctly states that the prisoner expressly said that he was instructed by his legal advisers wholly to reserve his defence ?
early in the morning , while my breakfast was getting ready , i strolled round by satis house .
but when that little child is dropped into heavier for that grab of whisker or shaking , then that man naterally up and says to himself , where is the good as you are a-doing ?
or it would be more expressive to say , faintly troubled its darkness .
but i saw him collapse as his master rubbed me out with his hands , and my first decided experience of the stupendous power of money was , that it had morally laid upon his back trabb’s boy .
“ anyhow , my dear handel , ” said he presently , “ soldiering won’t do .
herbert was highly delighted when we shook hands on this arrangement , and said he could now take courage to tell me that he believed he must go away at the end of the week .
early in the week , or say wednesday , you might do what you know of , if you felt disposed to try it .
round by the corner where herbert and i had fought our battle ;
for some days , i even kept close at home , and looked out at the kitchen door with the greatest caution and trepidation before going on an errand , lest the officers of the county jail should pounce upon me .
you wouldn’t mind being at once introduced to the aged , would you ?
coming up again to the marsh level out of this excavation , for the rude path lay through it , i saw a light in the old sluice-house .
my depression was not alleviated by the announcement , for , i had supposed that establishment to be an hotel kept by mr barnard , to which the blue boar in our town was a mere public-house .
i don’t ask you what you read just now .
we arranged that herbert should not come home to dinner before going to mill pond bank that evening ;
” said my convict to the sergeant .
he cross-examined his very wine when he had nothing else in hand .
his eyes were set very deep in his head , and were disagreeably sharp and suspicious .
and when you’re well enough to go out for a ride what larks !
“ i don’t wish to make a display of my feelings , but i have habitually thought of you more in the night than i am quite equal to .
my hands had been dressed twice or thrice in the night , and again in the morning .
“ well , sir , ” pursued joe , “ this is how it were .
“ which that were my own belief , ” answered joe ;
but declined to accord that grace to my two friends .
and biddy said , “ i ought to have thought of it , dear joe , but i was too happy .
i thought it had the most dismal trees in it , and the most dismal sparrows , and the most dismal cats , and the most dismal houses (in number half a dozen or so) , that i had ever seen .
she set her hand upon her stick in the resolute way that sometimes was habitual to her , and looked at the fire with a strong expression of forcing herself to attend .
now , i’ll tell you what i have got for supper , mr pip .
“ at last , it is .
it ain’t a grab at a man’s whisker , not yet a shake or two of a man (to which your sister was quite welcome) , that ’ud put a man off from getting a little child out of punishment .
“ trouble ?
and may i may i ?
“ how are you , and what can i do for you ?
i knew the limekiln as well as i knew the old battery , but they were miles apart ;
“ and him i found .
the waiter reappeared .
old london bridge was soon passed , and old billingsgate market with its oyster-boats and dutchmen , and the white tower and traitor’s gate , and we were in among the tiers of shipping .
“ i am over the way .
poor , poor old place !
when i reached home , my sister was very curious to know all about miss havisham’s , and asked a number of questions .
“ lord bless the boy !
she answered in a low whisper and with caution :
“ is it not true , ” said i , “ that bentley drummle is in town here , and pursuing you ?
” asked miss havisham .
the last man i should have expected to see in that place of porter at miss havisham’s door .
and , both in going and returning , we saw the blind towards the east come down .
it was as if i had to make up my mind to leap from the top of a high house , or plunge into a great depth of water .
herbert in the bow , i steering .
there was a clear space of a few feet between the table and the opposite wall .
i had seen the damp lying on the outside of my little window , as if some goblin had been crying there all night , and using the window for a pocket-handkerchief .
as the tide made , it flapped heavily at irregular intervals against the shore ;
without having any definite idea of the penalties i had incurred , it was clear to me that village boys could not go stalking about the country , ravaging the houses of gentlefolks and pitching into the studious youth of england , without laying themselves open to severe punishment .
“ are you known in london ?
and i doubt if i even knew who she was , or why we had struggled , or that she had been in flames , or that the flames were out , until i saw the patches of tinder that had been her garments no longer alight but falling in a black shower around us .
” said drummle .
while i did so , he stood at the table drinking rum and eating biscuit ;
i am putting a case .
“ it would turn a man’s blood to white wine winegar to hear him tell of it , sir , ” said the landlord .
but she was so much changed , was so much more beautiful , so much more womanly , in all things winning admiration , had made such wonderful advance , that i seemed to have made none .
we were equals afterwards , as we had been before ;
assistance was sent for , and i held her until it came , as if i unreasonably fancied (i think i did) that , if i let her go , the fire would break out again and consume her .
“ your own act , estella , to fling yourself away upon a brute ?
the cut of her dress from the waist upward , both before and behind , made her figure very like a boy’s kite ;
i opened my eyes in the day , and , sitting on the window-seat , smoking his pipe in the shaded open window , still i saw joe .
or would it worry you just now ?
but returning to what you said , you know , ” pursued the old man , again laughing heartily , “ what i say is , no to be sure ;
rather tall , of a lithe nimble figure , extremely pale , with large faded eyes , and a quantity of streaming hair .
” he said this with the air of one carefully reckoning up and striking a balance .
the last i saw of him , his head was bent over his knee and he was working hard at his fetter , muttering impatient imprecations at it and at his leg .
“ more than that , eh !
my thoughts strayed from that question as i looked disconsolately at the fire .
breakfast had been ordered at a pleasant little tavern , a mile or so away upon the rising ground beyond the green ;
thieves and thief-takers hung in dread rapture on his words , and shrank when a hair of his eyebrows turned in their direction .
yet he would smoke his pipe at the battery with a far more sagacious air than anywhere else , even with a learned air , as if he considered himself to be advancing immensely .
“ looks pretty ;
i never was so much surprised in all my life , couldn’t credit my own ed , to tell you the truth , hardly believed it were my own ed .
that orlick !
and i was conscious of growing high-shouldered on one side , in my shrinking endeavours to fend him off .
it occurred to me as inconsistent , that , for any mastering idea , he should have endangered his freedom , and even his life .
“ mrs joe , ” said uncle pumblechook , a large hard-breathing middle-aged slow man , with a mouth like a fish , dull staring eyes , and sandy hair standing upright on his head , so that he looked as if he had just been all but choked , and had that moment come to , “ i have brought you as the compliments of the season i have brought you , mum , a bottle of sherry wine and i have brought you , mum , a bottle of port wine .
the air felt cold upon the river , but it was a bright day , and the sunshine was very cheering .
let us out , you old fox , or i’ll get him to bring an action against you for false imprisonment .
out-of-the-way villages there , they tell me .
“ from the hulks !
” said i .
“ i believe you !
i first become aware of myself down in essex , a thieving turnips for my living .
nothing came of the late struggle .
this practical authority confused me very much by saying i had the arm of a blacksmith .
” said he , biting the side of his great forefinger as he frowned at me , “ you behave yourself !
we dined on these occasions in the kitchen , and adjourned , for the nuts and oranges and apples to the parlour ;
consisting of a noble boy in the wash-leather boots of a gigantic ancestor , a venerable peer with a dirty face who seemed to have risen from the people late in life , and the danish chivalry with a comb in its hair and a pair of white silk legs , and presenting on the whole a feminine appearance .
“ how much more ?
i leaned over joe , and , with the aid of my forefinger read him the whole letter .
“ why don’t you cry ?
it was a song that imitated the measure of beating upon iron , and was a mere lyrical excuse for the introduction of old clem’s respected name .
he was coming round a narrow corner .
“ i am , ” said herbert ;
trabb’s boy trabb’s overgrown young man now went before us with a lantern , which was the light i had seen come in at the door .
under its influence (and perhaps to make up for the want of the softer feeling) i was seized with a violent indignation against the assailant from whom she had suffered so much ;
their ironed legs , apologetically garlanded with pocket-handkerchiefs ;
i asked him if he had ever seen miss havisham’s adopted daughter , mrs bentley drummle .
it was you as did for your shrew sister .
“ the late compeyson , ” said wemmick , “ had by little and little got at the bottom of half of the regular business now transacted ;
if you are saved , your child is saved too ;
i had no hope of deliverance through my all-powerful sister , who repulsed me at every turn ;
do you want anything ?
” so , with a quiet sigh for me , biddy rose from the bank , and said , with a fresh and pleasant change of voice , “ shall we walk a little farther , or go home ?
having thought of the matter with care , i approached my subject as if i had never hinted at it before .
every word .
he’s in wonderful feather .
at last we came to the door of a room , and she said , “ go in .
though she looked steadily at me , i saw that she was rather confused .
for the daughter’s ?
i never met such a liar as you !
“ arter you was took ill , pretty much about what you might call (if you was put to it) a week , ” said joe ;
go up alonger this drivelling sick man ,’ he says to his wife , and magwitch , lend her a hand , will you ?’ but he never come nigh himself .
mr jaggers was querulous and angry with me for having “ let it slip through my fingers , ” and said we must memorialise by and by , and try at all events for some of it .
“ thank’ee dear boy , thank’ee .
“ and will continue friends apart , ” said estella .
the windows of the rooms on that side , lately occupied by provis , were dark and still , and there was no lounger in garden court .
of barges , sailing colliers , and coasting-traders , there were perhaps , as many as now ;
miss havisham was taking exercise in the room with the long spread table , leaning on her crutch stick .
if we had been waited on by any boat , i should have run in to shore , and have obliged her to go on , or to make her purpose evident .
” said he .
” said i .
you are not going to say into the old estella ?
when i raised my face again , there was such a ghastly look upon miss havisham’s , that it impressed me , even in my passionate hurry and grief .
you’re a deal worse than him !
i could not doubt , either , that he was there , because i was there , and that , however slight an appearance of danger there might be about us , danger was always near and active .
i don’t know how this was .
” exclaimed the man , striking his left cheek mercilessly , with the flat of his hand .
for my heart was softened by my return , and such a change had come to pass , that i felt like one who was toiling home barefoot from distant travel , and whose wanderings had lasted many years .
through all my punishments , disgraces , fasts , and vigils , and other penitential performances , i had nursed this assurance ;
it was evening when i arrived , much fatigued by the journey i had so often made so easily .
after this escape , i was content to take a foggy view of the inn through the window’s encrusting dirt , and to stand dolefully looking out , saying to myself that london was decidedly overrated .
and something so confiding , loving , and innocent in her modest manner of yielding herself to herbert’s embracing arm ;
this has two advantages .
“ look here , you sir .
here and there , the set of the current had worn down the bank into a little creek , and we were all suspicious of such places , and eyed them nervously .
” said wemmick , in a tone drier than any sawdust .
nobody was hard with him or with me .
“ no ;
seated , that he might get breath enough to keep life in him .
the interval between that time and supper wemmick devoted to showing me his collection of curiosities .
“ gracious you , indeed , mum !
but i had my keys , and , if herbert were gone to bed , could get to bed myself without disturbing him .
here’s her allowance of bread , and here’s her slice of cheese , and here’s her rum , which i drink .
” said mr jaggers .
without going near it yourself , you could always hear of the safety of tom , jack , or richard , through mr herbert .
while the pair of coarse , fat office candles that dimly lighted mr jaggers as he wrote in a corner were decorated with dirty winding-sheets , as if in remembrance of a host of hanged clients .
a man needn’t go far to find a subject , if he’s ready with his salt-box .
“ cousin raymond , ” observed another lady , “ we are to love our neighbour .
she turned her face to me for the first time since she had averted it , and , to my amazement , i may even add to my terror , dropped on her knees at my feet ;
i mentioned my reason for desiring to avoid observation in the village , and he lauded it to the skies .
“ you did , ” said i .
if they had asked me any more questions , i should undoubtedly have betrayed myself , for i was even then on the point of mentioning that there was a balloon in the yard , and should have hazarded the statement but for my invention being divided between that phenomenon and a bear in the brewery .
“ because you are going to tell upstairs .
it began to be unnecessary to repeat the form of saying he might , so he did it at once .
within this space , he now slouched backwards and forwards .
“ you are the husband , ” repeated miss havisham , “ of the sister of this boy ?
it matters not what stranded ships repairing in dry docks i lost myself among , what old hulls of ships in course of being knocked to pieces , what ooze and slime and other dregs of tide , what yards of ship-builders and ship-breakers , what rusty anchors blindly biting into the ground , though for years off duty , what mountainous country of accumulated casks and timber , how many rope-walks that were not the old green copper .
penned in the dock , as i again stood outside it at the corner with his hand in mine , were the two-and-thirty men and women ;
it is not much to give to the theme that so long filled my heart .
“ mr herbert , ” said wemmick , “ after being all of a heap for half an hour , struck out a plan .
don’t you see her ?
now joseph , you know the case .
and i saw him on one occasion deliver himself at the door of the grove in this unintentional way like coals .
there was a door in the kitchen , communicating with the forge ;
what do you think of it , joe ?
“ halloa !
all that i know about miss havisham , you know .
all i possess is freely yours .
an’t you ?
“ the night being so bad , sir , ” said the watchman , as he gave me back my glass , “ uncommon few have come in at my gate .
early in the morning i was to go .
“ and i couldn’t be a match for the noodles , without being a match for your master , who’s the dunder-headed king of the noodles .
“ you can then ?
“ nothing but beggar my neighbour , miss .
bless your eyes , here’s old bill barley .
that miserable man would seem for a time to have become convinced of his errors , when far removed from the scenes of his old offences , and to have lived a peaceable and honest life .
” said i , with great anxiety .
first , with her left hand she jammed the loaf hard and fast against her bib , where it sometimes got a pin into it , and sometimes a needle , which we afterwards got into our mouths .
it appeared to me that it would take time to become uncommon , under these circumstances :
how does she use you ?
at last , me and compeyson was both committed for felony , on a charge of putting stolen notes in circulation , and there was other charges behind .
and sometimes , when her moods were so many and so contradictory of one another that i was puzzled what to say or do , miss havisham would embrace her with lavish fondness , murmuring something in her ear that sounded like “ break their hearts my pride and hope , break their hearts and have no mercy !
from estella she looked at me , with a searching glance that seemed to pry into my heart and probe its wounds .
a bell with an old voice which i dare say in its time had often said to the house , here is the green farthingale , here is the diamond-hilted sword , here are the shoes with red heels and the blue solitaire sounded gravely in the moonlight , and two cherry-coloured maids came fluttering out to receive estella .
“ she’s such a manager of fowls , you have no idea .
in our already-mentioned freemasonry as fellow-sufferers , and in his good-natured companionship with me , it was our evening habit to compare the way we bit through our slices , by silently holding them up to each other’s admiration now and then , which stimulated us to new exertions .
that swindling pumblechook , exalted into the beneficent contriver of the whole occasion , actually took the top of the table ;
she made a strong attempt to compose herself , and stammered that he was as punctual as ever .
after watching it for what appeared in the silence and by the light of the slowly wasting candles to be a long time , she was roused by the collapse of some of the red coals , and looked towards me again at first , vacantly then , with a gradually concentrating attention .
” for , i had a strange and strong misgiving that i had been lying there a long time a day and a night , two days and nights , more .
the constables and the bow street men from london for , this happened in the days of the extinct red-waistcoated police were about the house for a week or two , and did pretty much what i have heard and read of like authorities doing in other such cases .
“ i am tired , ” said miss havisham .
then , she put on her gloves again , and we drew round the fire , and wemmick said , “ now , aged parent , tip us the paper .
her memory also ;
i turned round to do so , and had taken up the candle in my hand , when it was extinguished by some violent shock ;
“ oh !
no ;
such is the profession !
after several times falling short of my destination and as often overshooting it , i came unexpectedly round a corner , upon mill pond bank .
” i nodded hard .
don’t say you don’t know that , mum .
and each time she said it , she opened her lovely eyes the wider .
i had not considered how i should take leave of her ;
miss havisham ?
she’s unfolding it .
“ once , ” returned joe .
“ then , herbert , estimate ;
in humouring my mistake , miss havisham , you punished practised on perhaps you will supply whatever term expresses your intention , without offence your self-seeking relations ?
if compeyson were alive and should discover his return , i could hardly doubt the consequence .
i was to remain with young mr pocket until monday ;
well ?
” said i .
so might you or i be .
“ anything else ?
“ miss a .
“ brought her here .
i am as unhappy as you can ever have meant me to be .
“ good .
i expressed the readiness i felt , and we went into the castle .
“ ah !
in my own house !
“ how can you think of such a thing ?
hob and nob , ” returned the sergeant .
with those words , he released me which i was glad of , for his hand smelt of scented soap and went his way downstairs .
still , the reference to provis by name mastered everything .
“ i took him !
“ how do you do ?
is not this as good a time as another for our knowing more ?
some of the windows had been walled up ;
after a prolonged absence at this stage of the entertainment , he at length came back with a casket of precious appearance containing twigs .
she’s coming to the bed .
“ yes , to be sure , ” said wemmick .
i stood with my lamp held out over the stair-rail , and he came slowly within its light .
it was one of those march days when the sun shines hot and the wind blows cold :
this i did next day , through herbert , as soon as i returned to town .
i , to get at once such passports as were necessary ;
“ now , ” said estella , gliding away the instant i touched her cheek , “ you are to take care that i have some tea , and you are to take me to richmond .
” cried my sister , addressing us both at once .
dear joe , i hope you will have children to love , and that some little fellow will sit in this chimney-corner of a winter night , who may remind you of another little fellow gone out of it for ever .
this left me no course but to regret that i had been “ betrayed into a warmth which , ” and on the whole to repudiate , as untenable , the idea that i was to be found anywhere .
” but i thought they seemed to think it rather a good idea too .
“ then , ” said mr jaggers , “ come and dine with me .
is it true ?
“ do you find her much changed , pip ?
the guilty knowledge that i was going to rob mrs joe i never thought i was going to rob joe , for i never thought of any of the housekeeping property as his united to the necessity of always keeping one hand on my bread and butter as i sat , or when i was ordered about the kitchen on any small errand , almost drove me out of my mind .
it was with considerable difficulty that i won him over to the assumption of a dress more like a prosperous farmer’s ;
if she tears your heart to pieces , and as it gets older and stronger it will tear deeper , love her , love her , love her !
“ that’s the way you know the noble-minded , sir !
i lay down with the greater part of my clothes on , and slept well for a few hours .
not above a mile , i reckon ?
“ that’s it , dear boy !
“ because , if it is to spite her , ” biddy pursued , “ i should think but you know best that might be better and more independently done by caring nothing for her words .
he was altogether too unsettled in his mind over it , to appreciate it comfortably i thought , or to have anybody to dine with him , without making a chop with his jaws at the visitor .
and you’ll take any pains , and spend any money , to drive me out of this country , will you ?
my mind grew very uneasy on the subject of the pale young gentleman .
we then separated for a few hours :
hears his number called , hears himself challenged , hears the rattle of the muskets , hears the orders make ready !
before she spoke again , she turned her eyes from me , and looked at the dress she wore , and at the dressing-table , and finally at herself in the looking-glass .
with those words , the clerk opened a door , and ushered me into an inner chamber at the back .
it being saturday night , i found the landlord looking rather grimly at these records ;
give the child into my hands , and i will do my best to bring you off .
he gravely touched his lips with his forefinger .
“ thankee , ” said he ;
“ i hope i may suppose that you would not be amused if they did me any harm .
besides being possessed by my sister’s idea that a mortifying and penitential character ought to be imparted to my diet , besides giving me as much crumb as possible in combination with as little butter , and putting such a quantity of warm water into my milk that it would have been more candid to have left the milk out altogether , his conversation consisted of nothing but arithmetic .
he turned it about in his mouth much longer than usual , pondering over it a good deal , and after all gulped it down like a pill .
if now considered in the light of a liberty , excuse it for the love of poor old days .
” asked my sister .
and whereas she had seldom or never been in my thoughts of late , i had now the strangest ideas that she was coming towards me in the street , or that she would presently knock at the door .
“ pooh !
will you drink something before you go ?
” i presently asked , with increasing diffidence .
mr wopsle’s great-aunt conquered a confirmed habit of living into which she had fallen , and biddy became a part of our establishment .
and here i may remark that when mr wopsle referred to me , he considered it a necessary part of such reference to rumple my hair and poke it into my eyes .
we both did what we had to do without any hindrance , and when we met again at one o’clock reported it done .
mrs pocket was sitting on a garden chair under a tree , reading , with her legs upon another garden chair ;
“ no , ” said he , “ not particularly .
i said i had been down to hear the carols .
i was in mortal terror of the young man who wanted my heart and liver ;
when have you found me false to your teaching ?
though i have no doubt , now , that the little i knew was extremely dear at the price .
“ (i’m sorry there weren’t a flag , pip) .
“ ah !
and of course herbert , beyond seizing a warm grip of my hand , pretended not to know it .
it was necessary for joe to hold on heavily to the table with his left elbow , and to get his right leg well out behind him , before he could begin ;
what alone was wanting to the realisation of a vast fortune , he considered to be more capital .
now , i’ll ask you another question , ” taking possession of mr wopsle , as if he had a right to him , “ do you know that none of these witnesses have yet been cross-examined ?
you’re right .
” said my convict , disdainfully .
you will please consider me your guardian .
“ i wish to say something respecting this escape .
biddy dropped her work , and looked at me .
“ nothing .
the whole scene starts out again in the vivid colours of the moment , down to the drops of april rain on the windows of the court , glittering in the rays of april sun .
“ immense , ” said i .
it was daylight when we reached the temple , and i went at once to bed , and lay in bed all day .
looking at me perfectly unmoved and with her fingers busy , she shook her head again .
while i felt sincerely obliged to him for being so interested and considerate , i had an odd half-provoked sense of suspicion upon me , that if joe had been coming to see him , he wouldn’t have been quite so brisk about it .
so that he was in it for a mere instant , and then out of it .
prettier than ever ;
” i suppose he was about five-and-twenty , but he usually spoke of himself as an ancient person .
i gave it as my opinion .
and i will faithfully hold you to that always , for you must have done me far more good than harm , let me feel now what sharp distress i may .
“ now , ” he pursued , “ concerning miss havisham .
is he here ?
if my time had run out , it would have left me still at the height of my perplexities , i dare say .
would us , pip ?
it was tempting to think of that expensive mercenary publicly airing his boots in the archway of the blue boar’s posting-yard ;
as i had often heard of them in the capacity of outside passengers , and had more than once seen them on the high road dangling their ironed legs over the coach roof , i had no cause to be surprised when herbert , meeting me in the yard , came up and told me there were two convicts going down with me .
this is him as i have seen brought up by hand .
dinner over , we produced a bundle of pens , a copious supply of ink , and a goodly show of writing and blotting paper .
“ why must it be done without his knowledge ?
“ yes , hard of hearing ;
“ betrothed .
but it struck me that he was softened , indefinably , for i could not have said how , and could never afterwards recall how when i tried , but certainly .
mr jaggers shook his head , not in negativing the question , but in altogether negativing the notion that he could anyhow be got to answer it , and the two horrible casts of the twitched faces looked , when my eyes strayed up to them , as if they had come to a crisis in their suspended attention , and were going to sneeze .
i was better after i had cried than before , more sorry , more aware of my own ingratitude , more gentle .
” she replied , glancing over her shoulder as he slouched after us , “ because i i am afraid he likes me .
i hope and do not doubt it will be agreeable to see him , even though a gentleman , for you had ever a good heart , and he is a worthy , worthy man .
” said the stranger to mr wopsle , when the reading was done , “ you have settled it all to your own satisfaction , i have no doubt ?
that’s the difference between the property and the owner , don’t you see ?
no one seemed surprised to see him , or interested in seeing him , or glad to see him , or sorry to see him , or spoke a word , except that somebody in the boat growled as if to dogs , “ give way , you !
this was very singular to me , and i looked at her in considerable perplexity .
i wish to pay for them , ” i added otherwise i thought he might only pretend to make them , “ with ready money .
but , the little roundabout lane by which i entered the village , for quietness’ sake , took me past it .
but she ought to know her own business best .
i heerd him !
“ there’s matthew !
i see you’d been a reading of ’em when i come in .
passing on into the front courtyard , i hesitated whether to call the woman to let me out at the locked gate of which she had the key , or first to go upstairs and assure myself that miss havisham was as safe and well as i had left her .
this is not for you to inquire into .
and still , not a word of the robbery .
camilla was mr pocket’s sister .
isn’t there bright eyes somewheres , wot you love the thoughts on ?
it’s bad enough to be a blacksmith’s wife (and him a gargery) without being your mother .
do you still think , in spite of it , that i do not mean what i say ?
my sister , mrs joe , throwing the door wide open , and finding an obstruction behind it , immediately divined the cause , and applied tickler to its further investigation .
“ when you came in at the gate and asked the watchman the way here , had you any one with you ?
” said i .
with all that ruin at my feet and about me , it seemed a natural place for me , that day .
chapter xlviii .
what like is miss havisham ?
my father , pip , he were given to drink , and when he were overtook with drink , he hammered away at my mother , most onmerciful .
i’m going to take a holiday .
” said she , fixing her eyes upon me .
and has it come to this !
i accepted the offer .
“ why ?
instead of going straight to the gate , too , she stepped back into the passage , and beckoned me .
pull both .
i wished joe had been rather more genteelly brought up , and then i should have been so too .
low .
“ no , my young friend , ” he interrupted , shaking his head and frowning and smiling both at once , “ no , no , no ;
no , i would not .
although i should not have thought of making , in that place , the most distant reference by so much as a look to wemmick’s walworth sentiments , yet i should have had no objection to catching his eye now and then in a friendly way .
long after these constitutional powers had dispersed , my sister lay very ill in bed .
“ yes , ” said he , nodding in the direction .
“ no , no , ” i answered , “ how can you think so , miss havisham !
seeing him , i felt that i was in a dangerous strait indeed , and i kept my eyes upon him .
no , no , no .
when this little interruption was over , joe resumed :
but everybody knew that it was hopeless now .
mr jaggers did the same .
“ i wouldn’t go into that , ” said wemmick , evasively , “ it might clash with official responsibilities .
old barley might be as old as the hills , and might swear like a whole field of troopers , but there were redeeming youth and trust and hope enough in chinks’s basin to fill it to overflowing .
but his greatest trials were in the churchyard , which had the appearance of a primeval forest , with a kind of small ecclesiastical wash-house on one side , and a turnpike gate on the other .
and as i saw the cattle lifting their heads to gaze after him , i wondered whether they thought so too .
now you pays for it .
where ?
he’s had a drop .
one afternoon , late in the month of february , i came ashore at the wharf at dusk .
“ pip , old chap !
“ never .
why , you have always told me all day long .
“ yes , joe .
and what light we had , seemed to come more from the river than the sky , as the oars in their dipping struck at a few reflected stars .
however , they were grown up and had their own way , and they made the most of it .
it came naturally to me at the moment to do this .
chapter xxiii .
and years have rolled away , and who’s to gain by it ?
we looked at one another until i withdrew my eyes , and looked thoughtfully at the floor .
but we further agreed that he should pull down the blind in that part of his window which gave upon the east , whenever he saw us and all was right .
but when i heard the sunday bells , and looked around a little more upon the outspread beauty , i felt that i was not nearly thankful enough , that i was too weak yet to be even that , and i laid my head on joe’s shoulder , as i had laid it long ago when he had taken me to the fair or where not , and it was too much for my young senses .
“ dear miss havisham , ” said miss sarah pocket .
one night he brought her here asleep , and i called her estella .
“ you have an apprentice , ” pursued the stranger , “ commonly known as pip ?
yes , joseph ,’ says you , ” here pumblechook shook his head and hand at me , “ he knows my total deficiency of common human gratitoode .
“ what do i mean ?
i waited about until it was noon , and i went upon ’change , and i saw fluey men sitting there under the bills about shipping , whom i took to be great merchants , though i couldn’t understand why they should all be out of spirits .
nor did i look towards wemmick until i had finished all i had to tell , and had been for some time silently meeting mr jaggers’s look .
because such littlenesses were their natural bent , and would have been evoked by anybody else , if i had left them slumbering .
over and over and over again , we would make these journeys , and sometimes they would last as long as three hours at a stretch .
“ biddy , ” i cried , getting up , putting my arm round her neck , and giving her a kiss , “ i shall always tell you everything .
“ now ?
” said mr jaggers ;
mr jaggers worked that in this way :
” said miss havisham , playing with estella’s hair .
i have unusual business to transact with you , and i commence by explaining that it is not of my originating .
however , did i find you out ?
” said she .
she came back , with some bread and meat and a little mug of beer .
“ you won’t succeed , ” said i .
“ ah-h-h !
once , it had seemed to me that when i should at last roll up my shirt-sleeves and go into the forge , joe’s ’prentice , i should be distinguished and happy .
“ oh-h !
“ let’s go in !
not a word was spoken in either boat .
if you don’t know that your bill’s in good hands , i know it .
theoretically , she was already as good a blacksmith as i , or better .
“ yes ;
and when joe sat with the poker on his knees thoughtfully raking out the ashes between the lower bars , my sister would so distinctly construe that innocent action into opposition on his part , that she would dive at him , take the poker out of his hands , shake him , and put it away .
she stared , and said in a low voice , “ is it real ?
” said sarah , with a dismal shake of the head ;
the dismal wind was muttering round the house , the tide was flapping at the shore , and i had a feeling that we were caged and threatened .
“ did that other creature come to the same end ?
shall i leave you twenty guineas ?
“ that makes it worse .
herbert would often come to hammersmith when i was there , and i think at those seasons his father would occasionally have some passing perception that the opening he was looking for , had not appeared yet .
i mean , i couldn’t undertake to say it was at first .
“ ma thear mithter jaggerth .
why do you injuriously introduce the name of my mother by adoption ?
“ wery good , then , ” said joe , as if i had answered ;
” “ and six ?
chokings and nervous jerkings , however , are nothing new to me when i think with anxiety of those i love .
all this she did without looking at me .
“ i am afraid he is a sad old rascal , ” said herbert , smiling , “ but i have never seen him .
here mr drummle looked at his boots and i looked at mine , and then mr drummle looked at my boots , and i looked at his .
“ it is noble in you to tell me that you have other causes of unhappiness .
” said biddy .
and even now he occasionally shut his eyes and threw his finger at me while he spoke , as much as to express that he knew all kinds of things to my disparagement , if he only chose to mention them .
“ dear boy , ” he answered , “ i’m quite content to take my chance .
you remember his breaking off here about some woman that he had had great trouble with .
“ don’t .
“ you know it’s provis .
“ my dear !
as if he had some urgent reason in his mind for being particular to half a quarter of an ounce .
my guardian lay at the boar in the next room to mine .
there were some marks in it that might have been dimples , if the material had been softer and the instrument finer , but which , as it was , were only dints .
we talk of you in the kitchen every night , and wonder what you are saying and doing .
official sentiments are one thing .
“ matthew will come and see me at last , ” said miss havisham , sternly , “ when i am laid on that table .
take another glass of wine , and excuse my mentioning that society as a body does not expect one to be so strictly conscientious in emptying one’s glass , as to turn it bottom upwards with the rim on one’s nose .
i’ll have no feelings here .
so was his daughter .
“ it would be much more commendable to be somebody else’s enemy , ” said the gentleman ;
” imperiously stopping me as i opened my lips .
there was an air of utter loneliness upon her , that would have moved me to pity though she had wilfully done me a deeper injury than i could charge her with .
my reason is to be found in what took place in mr pumblechook’s parlour :
“ mr jaggers was for her , ” pursued wemmick , with a look full of meaning , “ and worked the case in a way quite astonishing .
“ hulks !
this was all as it should be , and i went out in my new array , fearfully ashamed of having to pass the shopman , and suspicious after all that i was at a personal disadvantage , something like joe’s in his sunday suit .
partickler when he see the ghost .
and there was a bright flush upon her face , as though something had happened to delight her .
my thoughts passed into the great room across the landing where the table was spread , and i saw it written , as it were , in the falls of the cobwebs from the centre-piece , in the crawlings of the spiders on the cloth , in the tracks of the mice as they betook their little quickened hearts behind the panels , and in the gropings and pausings of the beetles on the floor .
i asked myself the question whether i did not surely know that if estella were beside me at that moment instead of biddy , she would make me miserable ?
my burning arm throbbed , and my burning head throbbed , and i fancied i was beginning to wander .
so , the spider , doggedly watching estella , outwatched many brighter insects , and would often uncoil himself and drop at the right nick of time .
it came to my knowledge , through what passed between mrs pocket and drummle while i was attentive to my knife and fork , spoon , glasses , and other instruments of self-destruction , that drummle , whose christian name was bentley , was actually the next heir but one to a baronetcy .
in and out , hammers going in ship-builders’ yards , saws going at timber , clashing engines going at things unknown , pumps going in leaky ships , capstans going , ships going out to sea , and unintelligible sea-creatures roaring curses over the bulwarks at respondent lightermen , in and out , out at last upon the clearer river , where the ships’ boys might take their fenders in , no longer fishing in troubled waters with them over the side , and where the festooned sails might fly out to the wind .
“ he was a world of trouble to you , ma’am , ” said mrs hubble , commiserating my sister .
mr jaggers had risen when joe demonstrated , and had backed near the door .
in about a month after that , the spider’s time with mr pocket was up for good , and , to the great relief of all the house but mrs pocket , he went home to the family hole .
why should a man scrape himself to that extent , before he could consider himself full dressed ?
for i could not divest myself of a misgiving that something might happen to london in the meanwhile , and that , when i got there , it would be either greatly deteriorated or clean gone .
” said herbert , getting up with a lively shake as if he had been asleep , and stirring the fire , “ now i’ll endeavour to make myself agreeable again !
good-day , pip !
“ i ought to give you a reason for fighting , too .
neither , indeed , was i at all clear or comfortable about it in my own mind , now that i saw him in that softer condition , and in declared peril for my sake .
“ well ?
” she asked , settling her hands upon her stick , that she might regard me the more attentively .
when i had begun to advance herbert’s prospects by stealth , i had been able to bear this with cheerful philosophy :
“ you know best , pip ;
now , i saw the damp lying on the bare hedges and spare grass , like a coarser sort of spiders’ webs ;
i’m famous for it .
in the heavy air of the room , and the heavy darkness that brooded in its remoter corners , i even had an alarming fancy that estella and i might presently begin to decay .
for , when we ran ashore to get some bottles of beer into the boat , and he was stepping out , i hinted that i thought he would be safest where he was , and he said .
an elderly woman , whom i had seen before as one of the servants who lived in the supplementary house across the back courtyard , opened the gate .
i was not long in discovering that she was a frequent visitor at the castle ;
that , if joe knew it , and at any subsequent period of our joint domestic life remarked that his beer was flat or thick , the conviction that he suspected tar in it , would bring a rush of blood to my face .
“ but it’s a secret .
it being market morning at a neighbouring town some ten miles off , mr pumblechook was not at home .
the early dinner hour at joe’s , left me abundance of time , without hurrying my talk with biddy , to walk over to the old spot before dark .
“ at , ” repeated mr jaggers , still looking at the ceiling , “ the rate of ?
with the aid of these appliances we all had something warm to drink , including the aged , who was soon awake again .
“ no .
“ no doubt , ” said i .
of course she did so purposely , and knew that i should treasure it up .
” said i , “ we must talk together a little more , as we used to do .
there are only four of us .
say good-night !
” returned estella .
“ i am not so unreasonable , sir , as to think you at all responsible for my mistakes and wrong conclusions ;
but what the devil was i to do ?
my opinion of those accessories was not favourable .
this effect on my anxious fancy was partly referable , no doubt , to his old face and manner growing more familiar to me ;
and far away there were the rising grounds , between which and us there seemed to be no life , save here and there in the foreground a melancholy gull .
for it was plain that i must see wemmick before seeing any one else , and equally plain that this was a case in which his walworth sentiments only could be taken .
“ large tract of marshes about here , i believe ?
how much do you want ?
thank you .
wishing to embrace the present occasion of finding out whether in teaching joe , i should have to begin quite at the beginning , i said , “ ah !
“ yes , joe .
our oarsmen were so fresh , by dint of having occasionally let her drive with the tide for a minute or two , that a quarter of an hour’s rest proved full as much as they wanted .
handel , my good fellow ;
“ two can go up town .
i put out my hand , and mr wemmick at first looked at it as if he thought i wanted something .
now , the hulks has got its gentleman again , through me .
the soldier with the basket soon got a light , and lighted three or four torches , and took one himself and distributed the others .
when i got up , on the surgeon’s coming to her with other aid , i was astonished to see that both my hands were burnt ;
now that i was left wholly to myself , i gave notice of my intention to quit the chambers in the temple as soon as my tenancy could legally determine , and in the meanwhile to underlet them .
“ if you say a word to me , i’ll throw up the case .
come !
dear boy and pip’s comrade , don’t you be afeerd of me being low .
herbert had come in , and we held a very serious council by the fire .
it ain’t a long walk , and it’s an early one .
“ he set up fur a gentleman , this compeyson , and he’d been to a public boarding-school and had learning .
” said wemmick .
and it hung so , that i could see that the faded trimmings of the dress were like earthy paper , and that the face was miss havisham’s , with a movement going over the whole countenance as if she were trying to call to me .
” on my turning round , they all looked at me with the utmost contempt , and , as i went out , i heard sarah pocket say , “ well i am sure !
“ never heard of it .
my construction even of their simple meaning was not very correct , for i read “ wife of the above ” as a complimentary reference to my father’s exaltation to a better world ;
“ not yet .
why , wemmick .
at length we gave it up , and pulled under the shore towards the tavern we had lately left , where we were received with no little surprise .
it’s professional :
i know that .
“ and now , though i know you have already done it in your own kind hearts , pray tell me , both , that you forgive me !
when she had exhausted a torrent of such inquiries , she threw a candlestick at joe , burst into a loud sobbing , got out the dustpan , which was always a very bad sign , put on her coarse apron , and began cleaning up to a terrible extent .
beyond that , i have nothing .
and who , under circumstances of great violence and daring , had made his escape and been re-sentenced to exile for life .
“ o , lord !
when these points were settled , and so far carried out as that i had begun to work in earnest , it occurred to me that if i could retain my bedroom in barnard’s inn , my life would be agreeably varied , while my manners would be none the worse for herbert’s society .
to have got one i must have struck it out of flint and steel , and have made a noise like the very pirate himself rattling his chains .
there was a tray ready on a side-table .
and bits of those brambles were actually found in her skin and put in evidence , as well as the fact that the brambles in question were found on examination to have been broken through , and to have little shreds of her dress and little spots of blood upon them here and there .
“ i made it , ” said joe , “ my own self .
but the crew of the galley righted her with great speed , and , pulling certain swift strong strokes ahead , lay upon their oars , every man looking silently and eagerly at the water astern .
my sister had a trenchant way of cutting our bread and butter for us , that never varied .
as i lay in bed looking at him , it made me , in my weak state , cry again with pleasure to see the pride with which he set about his letter .
it did not appear quite so unlikely to me that evening , as it would have done if we had discussed it a few hours before .
i should hardly have thought this was your beat .
“ then let him come .
i am going to try to get the place of mistress in the new school nearly finished here .
“ you hit the nail on the head .
as i passed him , his teeth loudly chattered in his head , and with every mark of extreme humiliation , he prostrated himself in the dust .
“ why , yes , dear boy , it’s as good as another , unless you’d like another .
mrs what’s the name of them wild beasts with humps , old chap ?
“ the warehousing , the warehousing .
but again there came upon me , for my relief , that odd impression that herbert pocket would never be very successful or rich .
“ you like that , don’t you ?
“ i should like to see him argue the question with me .
“ soon forgotten !
to see her with her white hair and her worn face kneeling at my feet gave me a shock through all my frame .
but , he was on his feet directly , and after sponging himself with a great show of dexterity began squaring again .
“ no , ” said i , “ i had quite enough of the finches the last time i was there .
“ i fancy , ” said estella , shrinking “ that must be a curious place .
” said miss havisham .
why , they would have it so !
“ who is it ?
“ it’s you , is it ?
i thought this odd ;
when i had no more ticks to make , i folded all my bills up uniformly , docketed each on the back , and tied the whole into a symmetrical bundle .
after that day , a day rarely passed without her drawing the hammer on her slate , and without orlick’s slouching in and standing doggedly before her , as if he knew no more than i did what to make of it .
the two brutal casts , always inseparable in my mind from the official proceedings , seemed to be congestively considering whether they didn’t smell fire at the present moment .
i could not have spoken one word , though it had been to save my life .
they must not be confounded together .
my first question when i saw herbert had been of course , whether all was well down the river ?
“ i should think it was a strong point , ” said herbert , “ and i should think you would be puzzled to imagine a stronger ;
but she recalled it again before i understood the action , or knew how to receive it .
he had glittering eyes , small , keen , and black , and thin wide mottled lips .
i know no more .
that he should prepare provis to come down to some stairs hard by the house , on wednesday , when he saw us approach , and not sooner ;
but as she brought with her the three ladies and the gentleman whom i had seen below , i didn’t know what to do .
“ does he ever come back to this neighbourhood ?
going back to my window , i could see the two men moving over the marsh .
several curious little circumstances transpired as the action proceeded .
i am what shall i say i am to-day ?
and wemmick said , “ i do .
a little before dusk , my orders are .
“ then , my dear handel , ” said he , turning round as the door opened , “ here is the dinner , and i must beg of you to take the top of the table , because the dinner is of your providing .
“ and joe , how smart you are !
“ what is easier , you know ?
“ do you , dear boy ?
on the evening of the very night when the object of her jealousy was strangled as i tell you , the young woman presented herself before provis for one moment , and swore that she would destroy the child (which was in her possession) , and he should never see it again ;
she had been struck with something blunt and heavy , on the head and spine ;
go and speak to flopson .
“ and do you remember , ” retorted mr jaggers , “ that but for me you wouldn’t be here and couldn’t be here ?
” mr pumblechook began again when he had recovered ;
i was going to excuse myself , when he added , “ wemmick’s coming .
having borne this flattering testimony to the merits of our dwelling-place , and having incidentally shown this tendency to call me “ sir , ” joe , being invited to sit down to table , looked all round the room for a suitable spot on which to deposit his hat , as if it were only on some very few rare substances in nature that it could find a resting place , and ultimately stood it on an extreme corner of the chimney-piece , from which it ever afterwards fell off at intervals .
he had gone to town exactly as he told us when we picked him up at the turnpike , he had been seen about town all the evening , he had been in divers companies in several public-houses , and he had come back with myself and mr wopsle .
if i want you , i know where to find you ;
“ well , old chap , ” said joe , “ then abide by your words .
so you go to-morrow ?
by this time , the rooms were vastly different from what i had found them , and i enjoyed the honour of occupying a few prominent pages in the books of a neighbouring upholsterer .
here , mr trabb had taken unto himself the best table , and had got all the leaves up , and was holding a kind of black bazaar , with the aid of a quantity of black pins .
she concluded by throwing me i often served as a connubial missile at joe , who , glad to get hold of me on any terms , passed me on into the chimney and quietly fenced me up there with his great leg .
but i felt that the kiss was given to the coarse common boy as a piece of money might have been , and that it was worth nothing .
the interview lasted but a few minutes , and she gave me a guinea when i was going , and told me to come again on my next birthday .
while i looked about me here , an exceedingly dirty and partially drunk minister of justice asked me if i would like to step in and hear a trial or so :
for when i yielded to the temptation presented by the casks , and began to walk on them , i saw her walking on them at the end of the yard of casks .
the time came , without bringing with it any relief to my feelings , and the company came .
i think i shall trade , ” said he , leaning back in his chair , “ to the east indies , for silks , shawls , spices , dyes , drugs , and precious woods .
“ let us never be blind , ” said mr pumblechook , “ to her faults of temper , but it is to be hoped she meant well .
also , there were two double-bedded rooms , “ such as they were , ” the landlord said .
only i don’t like it ;
” said mr jaggers , suddenly stopping , and turning on the two women with the shawls , from whom the three men had meekly separated , “ oh !
our chambers were in garden-court , down by the river .
perhaps the latter possibility may be the nearer to the truth .
the fact was , that when the five hundred pounds had come into my pocket , a thought had come into my head which had been often there before ;
“ wolf !
he was not there a minute , and he is gone .
“ i’d have spent ’em on a man , in wittles and drink .
it was the first time i had ever lain down to rest in satis house , and sleep refused to come near me .
” here , he skipped from his right leg on to his left .
“ he don’t mean that you should know what to make of it .
“ you can’t detach yourself ?
so imperfect was this realisation of the first of my great expectations , that i looked in dismay at mr wemmick .
to the best of my belief , those efforts entirely failed .
but what did i think ?
” though he called me mr pip , and began rather to make up to me , he still could not get rid of a certain air of bullying suspicion ;
to tell you the truth , i think he is ;
at the mention of each name , she had struck the table with her stick in a new place .
i had the highest opinion of the wisdom of this same margin , but i am bound to acknowledge that on looking back , i deem it to have been an expensive device .
“ put the case , pip , that here was one pretty little child out of the heap who could be saved ;
“ why don’t i rise ?
the schoolhouse where biddy was mistress i had never seen ;
every morning , with an air ever new , herbert went into the city to look about him .
all right , my boy !
now , mum , with respections to this boy !
“ that’s what i told you not to do , ” said mr jaggers .
“ now , wolf , ” said he , “ afore i kill you like any other beast , which is wot i mean to do and wot i have tied you up for , i’ll have a good look at you and a good goad at you .
” i asked .
and his wish were , ” said joe , getting the bird’s-nest under his left arm for the moment , and groping in it for an egg with his right ;
the change was made in me ;
“ mamma , ” said herbert , “ this is young mr pip .
it were always a pity as i was so awful dull ;
that , in seclusion , she had secluded herself from a thousand natural and healing influences ;
they always came into my mind as the acts of injudicious relatives of his , goaded on by the state of his visage and an indignant sympathy with the family features .
i have heard about it , pip .
“ i don’t mean to imply that he won’t , ” said i , “ but it might make you hold your tongue about us and our money , i should think .
and mrs pocket’s two nurse-maids were looking about them while the children played .
“ well , old chap , ” said joe , “ it do appear that she had settled the most of it , which i meantersay tied it up , on miss estella .
i had scant luggage to take with me to london , for little of the little i possessed was adapted to my new station .
“ o yes , sir !
” i would not have confessed to my visit for any consideration .
“ mr jaggers left word , would you wait in his room .
” asked mrs joe .
but she couldn’t , at all events , she didn’t .
ain’t us , pip ?
“ and therefore , ” i went on , “ with your leave , i will suggest that we hold no kind of communication in future .
i made out that i was fastened to a stout perpendicular ladder a few inches from the wall , a fixture there , the means of ascent to the loft above .
why , you fool , don’t you know she’s got a living body ?
“ my name , ” he said , “ is jaggers , and i am a lawyer in london .
“ yes , joe .
” demanded joe .
which appeared to me to be an inquiry of unnecessary strength .
that’s loaded , that is .
as soon as i arrived , i sent a penitential codfish and barrel of oysters to joe (as reparation for not having gone myself) , and then went on to barnard’s inn .
you are envious , biddy , and grudging .
” the united vastness and distinctness of this view so struck him , that he no longer asked if he might shake hands with me , but said he really must , and did .
but , imperceptibly , though i held by them fast , joe’s hold upon them began to slacken ;
when i came down again , i found joe and orlick sweeping up , without any other traces of discomposure than a slit in one of orlick’s nostrils , which was neither expressive nor ornamental .
” and now before i say anything more about my father , or my father’s son , and repay confidence with confidence , i want to make myself seriously disagreeable to you for a moment , positively repulsive .
i took some wittles , up at the willage over yonder , where the church stands a’most out on the marshes .
she had not quite finished dressing , for she had but one shoe on , the other was on the table near her hand , her veil was but half arranged , her watch and chain were not put on , and some lace for her bosom lay with those trinkets , and with her handkerchief , and gloves , and some flowers , and a prayer-book all confusedly heaped about the looking-glass .
what odds , dear boy ?
the space interposed between myself and them partook of that expansion , and our marshes were any distance off .
and so the dustman says , i believe , with the strongest approval , and so does the marine-store shop in the back street .
she has been with him many a long year .
“ how can i take care of the dear child otherwise ?
have you ever heard of any tutor whom you would prefer to another ?
“ i am !
i walked away at a good pace , thinking it was easier to go than i had supposed it would be , and reflecting that it would never have done to have had an old shoe thrown after the coach , in sight of all the high street .
nor did the counting-house where herbert assisted , show in my eyes as at all a good observatory ;
for she rose up in the chair , in her shroud of a dress , and struck at the air as if she would as soon have struck herself against the wall and fallen dead .
“ o yes , ” he returned , “ these are all gifts of that kind .
“ biddy , ” said i , when i talked with her after dinner , as her little girl lay sleeping in her lap , “ you must give pip to me one of these days ;
“ i haven’t begun insuring yet , ” he replied .
as to myself , i felt all face , steeped in wine and smarting .
i don’t mean a present .
he guided himself by it , no doubt .
believe this :
there started up , from the gate , or from the rushes , or from the ooze (which was quite in his stagnant way) , old orlick .
“ at the hulks ?
there was no doing it in the night , for there was no getting a light by easy friction then ;
“ rum , ” said mr wopsle .
proceeding into the castle again , we found the aged heating the poker , with expectant eyes , as a preliminary to the performance of this great nightly ceremony .
having read of him in the newspapers , before i and the world parted .
“ now , i warned you before , ” said he , throwing his forefinger at the terrified client , “ that if you ever presumed to talk in that way here , i’d make an example of you .
“ mr jaggers is your guardian , i understand ?
chapter iv .
“ young havisham’s name was arthur .
“ but mr jaggers brought her here , or sent her here ?
the wall , especially opposite to mr jaggers’s chair , being greasy with shoulders .
“ i thought you was late .
“ oh !
this contrasting of them with the rest seemed , i was glad to see , to do them good with her .
“ so , you haven’t dined with mr jaggers yet ?
” echoed biddy .
or why , if she did wear it at all , she should not have taken it off , every day of her life .
they had been there ever since i could remember , and had grown more than i had .
he had said all the rest , as if he had forgotten my being there ;
for i really had not been myself since the receipt of the letter ;
pocket , jun .
after a very short delay , she returned and took me up , staring at me all the way .
from little britain i went , with my check in my pocket , to miss skiffins’s brother , the accountant ;
dear me !
you consider it so ?
do me the favour to be seated , sir .
that i knew of the slightest action of his fingers .
yes it were .
certainly not so many .
“ well ?
he makes tremendous rows , roars , and pegs at the floor with some frightful instrument .
“ no , ” said i .
kiss it !
and if he asked me why i wanted it , and why i thought i had any right to it , i would tell him , little as he cared for such poor dreams , that i had loved estella dearly and long , and that although i had lost her , and must live a bereaved life , whatever concerned her was still nearer and dearer to me than anything else in the world .
i made a foolish pretence of not at first recognising it , and then told her .
the weather was miserably raw , and the two cursed the cold .
after three days more of recovery , i went down to the old place to put it in execution .
it is impossible to overstate the vividness of these images , and yet i was so intent , all the time , upon him himself , who would not be intent on the tiger crouching to spring !
i thought how joe and my sister were then sitting in the kitchen , and how i had come up to bed from the kitchen , and how miss havisham and estella never sat in a kitchen , but were far above the level of such common doings .
but as to not thinking of you in the night the idea !
he had no occasion to say after that that he had conceived an aversion for my patron , neither had i occasion to confess my own .
my eyes were fixed on the ladder against the wall , when i came to myself , had opened on it before my mind saw it , and thus as i recovered consciousness , i knew that i was in the place where i had lost it .
i shall buy up some good life assurance shares , and cut into the direction .
now , i won’t have it !
i thought i would give up that point too .
ah !
this mental exercise lasted until biddy made a rush at them and distributed three defaced bibles (shaped as if they had been unskilfully cut off the chump end of something) , more illegibly printed at the best than any curiosities of literature i have since met with , speckled all over with ironmould , and having various specimens of the insect world smashed between their leaves .
” retorted drummle .
for generally they got on very well indeed together .
and then i told joe that i felt very miserable , and that i hadn’t been able to explain myself to mrs joe and pumblechook , who were so rude to me , and that there had been a beautiful young lady at miss havisham’s who was dreadfully proud , and that she had said i was common , and that i knew i was common , and that i wished i was not common , and that the lies had come of it somehow , though i didn’t know how .
because i never recommend anybody .
“ the spider ?
at this point joe greatly augmented my curiosity by taking the utmost pains to open his mouth very wide , and to put it into the form of a word that looked to me like “ sulks .
“ i wish to be quite right , mr jaggers , and to keep to your directions ;
fine and beautiful !
i ought rather to write that i should have been alarmed if i had had energy and concentration enough to help me to the clear perception of any truth beyond the fact that i was falling very ill .
well !
“ if you talk of strength , ” said mr jaggers , “ i’ll show you a wrist .
has wemmick got it ?
” miss havisham asked her .
as to forming any plan for the future , i could as soon have formed an elephant .
“ a moment , my dear boy , and i have done .
but what else could be expected !
she , quite composed and most decidedly not worshipping the hem of mine .
pretending to read a smeary newspaper long out of date , which had nothing half so legible in its local news , as the foreign matter of coffee , pickles , fish sauces , gravy , melted butter , and wine with which it was sprinkled all over , as if it had taken the measles in a highly irregular form , i sat at my table while he stood before the fire .
“ pretty well ?
“ i’ll redeem it at once .
and i had no hope of him whenever he took to that placid occupation ;
i had never heard of any tutor but biddy and mr wopsle’s great-aunt ;
sit where i can see you when i am swore to , for the last o’ many times , and i don’t ask no more .
“ your head is cool ?
it was a rimy morning , and very damp .
it is still monday night .
but , i could not be sure of this unconsciousness on mr jaggers’s part before , though i was quite sure of it now .
i’ve seen letters ah !
“ pip , sir .
here is my hand .
“ only , ” said i , “ that you would not confound them with the others .
there was a melancholy wind , and the marshes were very dismal .
it could not be done , and the attempt to do it would inevitably engender suspicion .
“ most marshes is solitary , ” said joe .
“ now , master !
quite an untaught genius , i made the discovery of the line of action for myself .
and that they shared the profits .
“ be firm , herbert , ” i would retort , plying my own pen with great assiduity .
” said i .
he was awfully cold , to be sure .
but herbert was proud , and i could make no such proposal to him .
“ that’s it !
he received that piece of information with a yell of laughter , and dropped back , but came slouching after us at a little distance .
imperative mood , present tense :
“ of course it would be a great relief to me to ask you several questions , sir ;
therefore , i made no remark on joe’s first head ;
“ i am looking about me .
” here another burst of feeling .
and when she made an occasional bounce upon startop (who said very little to her) , or upon drummle (who said less) , i rather envied them for being on the opposite side of the table .
i felt as if , having been burnt before , it were now being boiled .
for , he was making the legs of the old gentleman who presided , quite convulsive under the table , by his denunciations of his conduct as the representative of british law and justice in that chair that day .
i sold all i had , and put aside as much as i could , for a composition with my creditors , who gave me ample time to pay them in full , and i went out and joined herbert .
at twenty minutes to nine ?
certain keys were hanging on the wall , to which he now added the gate key ;
” returned my sister .
biddy says , i know he will be very glad to have it by word of mouth , it is holiday time , you want to see him , go !’ i have now concluded , sir , ” said joe , rising from his chair , “ and , pip , i wish you ever well and ever prospering to a greater and a greater height .
but i never saw stronger in that respect , man’s or woman’s , than these .
either you know it , or you don’t know it .
“ yes , miss havisham .
“ well ?
when i was a hired-out shepherd in a solitary hut , not seeing no faces but faces of sheep till i half forgot wot men’s and women’s faces wos like , i see yourn .
close up here .
it may have been about a month after my sister’s reappearance in the kitchen , when biddy came to us with a small speckled box containing the whole of her worldly effects , and became a blessing to the household .
so it does me .
“ say that likewise , ” retorted pumblechook .
miss georgiana , she have twenty pound down .
i was not related to the outlaw , or connected with him by any recognisable tie ;
“ biddy !
leave this lad to me , ma’am ;
i know that these gratifying social ends were so invariably accomplished , that herbert and i understood nothing else to be referred to in the first standing toast of the society :
i had had no intercourse with the world at that time , and i imitated none of its many inhabitants who act in this manner .
i could answer this inquiry with a better heart than i had been able to find for the other question , and i said i was quite willing .
” said mr drummle , edging me a little away with his shoulder .
“ did you wish to see miss havisham ?
you’ll have opportunity enough to say about it , and hear about it , before it’s done with , you know .
i don’t approve of it .
” said i , for he was tending in that direction .
” said herbert .
” said biddy .
i turned at the door , and he was still looking hard at me , while the two vile casts on the shelf seemed to be trying to get their eyelids open , and to force out of their swollen throats , “ o , what a man he is !
they’re curiosities .
the freshness of her beauty was indeed gone , but its indescribable majesty and its indescribable charm remained .
why , from you .
as he pretended not to see me , i pretended not to see him .
you and her have pretty well hunted me out of this country , so far as getting a easy living in it goes , and i’ve took up with new companions , and new masters .
“ but that i make no admissions ?
it is said , at any rate .
herbert was my intimate companion and friend .
“ is this young gentleman one of the ’prentices or articled ones of your office ?
you’d be sorry arterwards to have done it .
on the question whether ’twas nobler in the mind to suffer , some roared yes , and some no , and some inclining to both opinions said “ toss up for it ;
where i took her into this wretched breast when it was first bleeding from its stabs , and where i have lavished years of tenderness upon her !
“ touch me .
for , after i had made the monster (out of the refuse of my washerwoman’s family) , and had clothed him with a blue coat , canary waistcoat , white cravat , creamy breeches , and the boots already mentioned , i had to find him a little to do and a great deal to eat ;
on wemmick’s return from working these mechanical appliances , i expressed the great admiration with which i regarded them , and he said , “ well , you know , they’re both pleasant and useful to the aged .
“ because , ” returned the sergeant , clapping him on the shoulder , “ you’re a man that knows what’s what .
he was the kindest of nurses , and at stated times took off the bandages , and steeped them in the cooling liquid that was kept ready , and put them on again , with a patient tenderness that i was deeply grateful for .
how irrevocable would have been his knowledge of it , if he had remained with me but another hour !
“ oh !
who smoothed the elbows of his wooden arm-chair , and nodded at her and at the fire , as if he had known all about it beforehand .
he little suspected with whose money .
the relief of being at last engaged in the execution of the purpose was so great to me that i felt it difficult to realise the condition in which i had been a few hours before .
his arms and legs were like great pincushions of those shapes , and his attire disguised him absurdly ;
” he exclaimed .
“ what ?
i still lay there .
you know what a file is ?
“ all right , mr wemmick .
that were your observation when i broke it off , pip ?
mr pocket did not object to this arrangement , but urged that before any step could possibly be taken in it , it must be submitted to my guardian .
her hearing was greatly impaired ;
you know it to be no , pip , and wherefore should i say it ?
i had left directions that i was to be called at seven ;
it was a desperate case , and it was comparatively early days with him then , and he worked it to general admiration ;
a thousand miss havishams haunted me .
” to which the cheerful aged replied , “ all right , john , my boy , all right !
“ then you are ?
and that’s the man , dear boy , what you see me a pounding in the ditch , according to what you truly told your comrade arter i was gone last night .
as she looked at it , and drew in her head again , murmuring , “ wretches !
it had so bewildered me , ensuing on the hurry of the morning .
“ you see , pip , ” joe pursued , as soon as he was past that danger , “ miss havisham done the handsome thing by you .
had i given joe’s innocent heart no cause to feel instinctively that as i got stronger , his hold upon me would be weaker , and that he had better loosen it in time and let me go , before i plucked myself away ?
“ are you bringing numbers five and eight , you vagabond , ” said mr trabb to the boy after that , “ or shall i kick you out of the shop and bring them myself ?
i felt impatient of him and out of temper with him ;
“ well , well !
when i said some reassuring words , she stretched out her tremulous right hand , as though she was going to touch me ;
“ so fur as i could find , there warn’t a soul that see young abel magwitch , with us little on him as in him , but wot caught fright at him , and either drove him off , or took him up .
as it was almost noon , joe and i held straight on to miss havisham’s house .
the brewery buildings had a little lane of communication with it , and the wooden gates of that lane stood open , and all the brewery beyond stood open , away to the high enclosing wall ;
“ you cold , cold heart !
and that was all i took by that motion .
as it turned out , however , that he only wanted me for a dramatic lay-figure , to be contradicted and embraced and wept over and bullied and clutched and stabbed and knocked about in a variety of ways , i soon declined that course of instruction ;
“ hark !
it’s yourn .
when we had played some half-dozen games , a day was appointed for my return , and i was taken down into the yard to be fed in the former dog-like manner .
it was only my head and my legs that i could move , but to that extent i struggled with all the force , until then unknown , that was within me .
“ i am expected , i believe ?
as the son grew a young man , he turned out riotous , extravagant , undutiful , altogether bad .
“ even if i remained in england and could hold my head up with the rest , how could i see you drummle’s wife ?
no less , no more .
from the character and turn of the inscription , “ also georgiana wife of the above , ” i drew a childish conclusion that my mother was freckled and sickly .
“ miss sarah , ” said joe , “ she have twenty-five pound perannium fur to buy pills , on account of being bilious .
let me start from my bed as i would , with the terror fresh upon me that he was discovered ;
“ do so , as he wishes it , ” i said to herbert .
” this was in allusion to its heavy black seal and border .
i would not have gone back to joe now , i would not have gone back to biddy now , for any consideration ;
you are acquainted with the young lady , most probably ?
“ undoubtedly .
he said no .
his employer would see to that , sir .
i have no objections to your mentioning , either up town or down town , if such should be your wishes , that it was right to do it , kind to do it , benevolent to do it , and that i would do it again .
“ when you came into the temple last night ” said i , pausing to wonder whether that could really have been last night , which seemed so long ago .
a teaboard , cups and saucers , plates , knives and forks (including carvers) , spoons (various) , salt-cellars , a meek little muffin confined with the utmost precaution under a strong iron cover , moses in the bulrushes typified by a soft bit of butter in a quantity of parsley , a pale loaf with a powdered head , two proof impressions of the bars of the kitchen fireplace on triangular bits of bread , and ultimately a fat family urn ;
you have been in every prospect i have ever seen since , on the river , on the sails of the ships , on the marshes , in the clouds , in the light , in the darkness , in the wind , in the woods , in the sea , in the streets .
every hour so increased my abhorrence of him , that i even think i might have yielded to this impulse in the first agonies of being so haunted , notwithstanding all he had done for me and the risk he ran , but for the knowledge that herbert must soon come back .
“ well !
or a eel !
i knew nothing until i knew that we were on the floor by the great table , and that patches of tinder yet alight were floating in the smoky air , which , a moment ago , had been her faded bridal dress .
“ rum .
that’s a gentleman’s , i hope !
that i dragged the great cloth from the table for the same purpose , and with it dragged down the heap of rottenness in the midst , and all the ugly things that sheltered there ;
that he resented this , and felt a jealousy about it ;
very fine young lady !
“ i will not allow anybody to interfere , ” said mrs pocket .
but , he neither looked at it , nor at the fire , but steadily looked at me .
” and did .
” “ and two ?
which i did , taking a cordial leave of the aged , and having passed a pleasant evening .
he said yes , but asked me for some of my “ gentleman’s linen ” to put on in the morning .
that i had fallen into a despicable habit of calling knaves jacks ;
“ come to the ground , and go through the preliminaries !
“ is it pumblechook’s house that has been broken into , then ?
“ no doubt .
it was not a verbal remark , but a proceeding in dumb-show , and was pointedly addressed to me .
“ when a man’s alone on these flats , with a light head and a light stomach , perishing of cold and want , he hears nothin’ all night , but guns firing , and voices calling .
“ come !
do what he would , and love me though he did , the light left his face ever and again , and a film came over the placid look at the white ceiling .
joe looked at her in a helpless way , then took a helpless bite , and looked at me again .
put that last case to yourself very carefully .
“ well !
from this last speech i derived the notion that miss havisham , for some reason or no reason , had not taken him into her confidence as to her designing me for estella ;
“ which i meantersay , pip , ” joe whispered me , as we were being what mr trabb called “ formed ” in the parlour , two and two , and it was dreadfully like a preparation for some grim kind of dance ;
“ ay , ay , dear boy !
afterwards , estella and i played at cards , as of yore , only we were skilful now , and played french games , and so the evening wore away , and i went to bed .
i defy him to do it .
but i began packing that same afternoon , and wildly packed up things that i knew i should want next morning , in a fiction that there was not a moment to be lost .
but all this time , why i was not to go home , and what had happened at home , and when i should go home , and whether provis was safe at home , were questions occupying my mind so busily , that one might have supposed there could be no more room in it for any other theme .
“ i sometimes have sick fancies , ” she went on , “ and i have a sick fancy that i want to see some play .
don’t be so proud , estella , and so inflexible .
there , you’ve got it .
without encroaching on forbidden ground , we may venture to say that there can be no doubt between ourselves of that fact .
” asked the gentleman , stopping and looking at me .
“ then don’t think of me , ” retorted miss havisham .
he then became visible through the window , violently plunging and expectorating , making the most hideous faces , and apparently out of his mind .
but he always aided and comforted me when he could , in some way of his own , and he always did so at dinner-time by giving me gravy , if there were any .
“ well , ” said joe , passing the poker into his left hand , that he might feel his whisker ;
” i asked , more for the sake of saying something than for information .
look angry at me , joe .
i signified that i had no doubt he would take it as an honour to be asked .
“ who’s firing ?
he had broken two ribs , they had wounded one of his lungs , and he breathed with great pain and difficulty , which increased daily .
” said mr pocket , junior .
there were carved garlands on the panelled walls , and as he stood among them giving us welcome , i know what kind of loops i thought they looked like .
biddy and pumblechook ;
and i know herbert thought so too .
“ ah !
” i answered , as my bitter tears fell fast on her hand , do what i would to restrain them ;
but i encouraged joe at the time .
all this made the feast delightful , and when the waiter was not there to watch me , my pleasure was without alloy .
now , take this piece of paper in your hand .
to which joe always added a pipe of tobacco .
miss havisham was going to make my fortune on a grand scale .
for when your poor sister had a mind to drop into you , it were not so much , ” said joe , in his favourite argumentative way , “ that she dropped into me too , if i put myself in opposition to her , but that she dropped into you always heavier for it .
“ who praised me when i learnt my lesson ?
as i came to myself (with the aid of a heavy thump between the shoulders , and the restorative exclamation “ yah !
“ go and sit down in your chair this moment !
she had a serpentine way of coming close at me when she pretended to be vitally interested in the friends and localities i had left , which was altogether snaky and fork-tongued ;
“ now , i’ll tell you a piece of information .
i made a dash and i done it .
not too much , but pretty well .
it was very cold , and , a collier coming by us , with her galley-fire smoking and flaring , looked like a comfortable home .
but wemmick was equally untiring and gentle in his vigilance , and the aged read on , quite unconscious of his many rescues .
under the low red glare of sunset , the beacon , and the gibbet , and the mound of the battery , and the opposite shore of the river , were plain , though all of a watery lead colour .
“ very few men have the power of wrist that this woman has .
that girl’s hard and haughty and capricious to the last degree , and has been brought up by miss havisham to wreak revenge on all the male sex .
” said herbert .
his being my lawyer , and his being the lawyer of your patron is a coincidence .
“ and , dear joe , you have the best wife in the whole world , and she will make you as happy as even you deserve to be , you dear , good , noble joe !
i sagaciously observed , if it didn’t signify to him , to whom did it signify ?
“ if we are to be thrown much together , you had better believe it at once .
but my father were that good in his hart that he couldn’t abear to be without us .
“ have you been to the grove since ?
he immediately began to talk to drummle :
but after this i ask you nothing .
joe and i gasped , and looked at one another .
well ?
she held the head of her stick against her heart as she stood looking at the table ;
” returned wemmick .
there’s enough of you !
“ it’s only to be hoped , ” said my sister , “ that he won’t be pompeyed .
i tried it with the load upon my leg (and that made me think afresh of the man with the load on his leg) , and found the tendency of exercise to bring the bread and butter out at my ankle , quite unmanageable .
“ dear , dear !
it’s lies , joe .
i had always proposed to myself to get him well down the river in the boat ;
some of his teeth had failed him since i saw him eat on the marshes , and as he turned his food in his mouth , and turned his head sideways to bring his strongest fangs to bear upon it , he looked terribly like a hungry old dog .
” said my friend , stopping in his crunching of pie-crust .
in the eastern story , the heavy slab that was to fall on the bed of state in the flush of conquest was slowly wrought out of the quarry , the tunnel for the rope to hold it in its place was slowly carried through the leagues of rock , the slab was slowly raised and fitted in the roof , the rope was rove to it and slowly taken through the miles of hollow to the great iron ring .
” asked my sister .
the other one still gasped , “ he tried he tried-to murder me .
and he had come , in his private and personal capacity , to say a few words of explanation in reference to that failure .
but i was not sorry to have mr jaggers and wemmick together , as wemmick would then hear for himself that i said nothing to compromise him .
and i had no other guide to chinks’s basin than the old green copper rope-walk .
” she asked me , again pointing with her stick ;
now !
as it came nearer , i saw it to be magwitch , swimming , but not swimming freely .
here’s old bill barley on the flat of his back , by the lord .
so he held out his hand for mine .
it’s a bad job , ” said wemmick , scratching his head , “ and i assure you i haven’t been so cut up for a long time .
there’s a subject !
at his particular request , i appointed to call for him at the castle at half past eight on monday morning , and so we parted for the time .
gravely , handel , for the subject is grave enough , you know how it is as well as i do .
the death close before me was terrible , but far more terrible than death was the dread of being misremembered after death .
wednesday morning was dawning when i looked out of window .
you may kiss me , if you like .
the soldiers were in front of us , extending into a pretty wide line with an interval between man and man .
and soon the tide began to slacken , and the craft lying at anchor to swing , and presently they had all swung round , and the ships that were taking advantage of the new tide to get up to the pool began to crowd upon us in a fleet , and we kept under the shore , as much out of the strength of the tide now as we could , standing carefully off from low shallows and mudbanks .
we had loin of pork for dinner , and greens grown on the estate ;
we have no choice , you and i , but to obey our instructions .
” said joe , in the placidest way .
if i could be less affectionate and sensitive , i should have a better digestion and an iron set of nerves .
” he went on .
but how it ended is certainly not doubtful , for the victim was found throttled .
the watchmaker , always poring over a little desk with a magnifying-glass at his eye , and always inspected by a group of smock-frocks poring over him through the glass of his shop-window , seemed to be about the only person in the high street whose trade engaged his attention .
“ you’re as proud of it as punch ;
” cried flopson .
“ and let me have none of your tricks here , ” said mr trabb , “ or you shall repent it , you young scoundrel , the longest day you have to live .
it commanded the causeway where we had hauled up our boat , and , as my eyes adapted themselves to the light of the clouded moon , i saw two men looking into her .
“ thank you , miss havisham ;
it was impossible for me to avoid seeing that she cared to attract me ;
“ biddy , ” said i , when we were walking homeward , “ i wish you could put me right .
” while i complied , he , not comprehending a single word , would stand before the fire surveying me with the air of an exhibitor , and i would see him , between the fingers of the hand with which i shaded my face , appealing in dumb show to the furniture to take notice of my proficiency .
he would find it was weak , he would say it was weak , and i was lost !
it began with the strange gentleman’s sitting down at the table , drawing the candle to him , and looking over some entries in his pocket-book .
i was made very uneasy in my mind by mrs pocket’s falling into a discussion with drummle respecting two baronetcies , while she ate a sliced orange steeped in sugar and wine , and , forgetting all about the baby on her lap , who did most appalling things with the nut-crackers .
the day came , but not the bridegroom .
this diverts suspicion and confuses it ;
shall i tell you ?
“ and now i ask you what you say to the conscience of that man who , with that passage before his eyes , can lay his head upon his pillow after having pronounced a fellow-creature guilty , unheard ?
“ more fool you , ” growled the other .
and we were very cautious indeed , more cautious than before , if that were possible , and i for my part never went near chinks’s basin , except when i rowed by , and then i only looked at mill pond bank as i looked at anything else .
at the appointed time i returned to miss havisham’s , and my hesitating ring at the gate brought out estella .
i had to put my hand behind his legs for the poker when i went up to the fireplace to stir the fire , but still pretended not to know him .
once , i actually did start out of bed in the night , and begin to dress myself in my worst clothes , hurriedly intending to leave him there with everything else i possessed , and enlist for india as a private soldier .
“ i write this by request of mr gargery , for to let you know that he is going to london in company with mr wopsle and would be glad if agreeable to be allowed to see you .
“ told would seem to imply verbal communication .
no , don’t wipe it off for god’s sake , give me your blackened hand !
and blast you all !
but i thought with dread that it was flowing towards magwitch , and that any black mark on its surface might be his pursuers , going swiftly , silently , and surely , to take him .
we loitered down to the temple stairs , and stood loitering there , as if we were not quite decided to go upon the water at all .
the real genuine one !
much of my unassisted self , and more by the help of biddy than of mr wopsle’s great-aunt , i struggled through the alphabet as if it had been a bramble-bush ;
whether that might be or mightn’t be , is a thing as can’t be looked into now , without putting your sister on the rampage ;
i could see in the action of estella’s fingers as they worked that she attended to what i said ;
i would dress at once and go to his room and surprise him ;
it was attempted to be set up , in proof of her jealousy , that she was under strong suspicion of having , at about the time of the murder , frantically destroyed her child by this man some three years old to revenge herself upon him .
“ yes .
that being the name i wanted , i knocked , and an elderly woman of a pleasant and thriving appearance responded .
which , proving to be merely , “ some tea for the lady , ” sent him out of the room in a very low state of mind .
come !
being at last touched on the shoulder , i started and turned .
” lord bless you , i have heard him , a hundred times , if i have heard him once , say to regular cracksmen in our front office , “ you know where i live ;
if he’s always right (which in general he’s more likely wrong) , he’s right when he says this :
these precautions well understood by both of us , i went home .
i went into a coffee-house to write a little note to clara , telling her he had gone off , sending his love to her over and over again , and then went to my lonely home , if it deserved the name ;
for , though i had never seen the handwriting in which it was addressed , i divined whose hand it was .
ask him , ” said herbert , “ when we sit at breakfast in the morning .
of those that remained , all the lower were rustily barred .
“ you young dog , ” said the man , licking his lips , “ what fat cheeks you ha’ got .
there was such a malignant enjoyment in her utterance of the last words , and she broke into such a disagreeable laugh , that i was at a loss what to say .
then , a burst of gratitude came upon me , that she should be destined for me , once the blacksmith’s boy .
at a change in his manner as if he were even going to embrace me , i laid a hand upon his breast and put him away .
both in going and returning , i had seen the signal in his window , all well .
he was in a decline , and was a shadow to look at .
herbert got a large bottle of stuff for my arm ;
you can’t have verbal communication with a man in new south wales , you know .
i had got on so fast of late , that i had even started a boy in boots , top boots , in bondage and slavery to whom i might have been said to pass my days .
sometimes alone , sometimes with herbert .
“ this is wery liberal on your part , pip , ” said joe , “ and it is as such received and grateful welcome , though never looked for , far nor near , nor nowheres .
“ yonder , ” said i , pointing ;
“ have another glass !
come , pip , ” said joe , persuasively , “ if there warn’t no weal-cutlets , at least there was dogs ?
he’s a wonderful man , without his living likeness ;
it was by the finger-post at the end of the village , and i laid my hand upon it , and said , “ good-bye , o my dear , dear friend !
“ quite , ” said i .
“ astonishing !
there were three ladies in the room and one gentleman .
the furniture’s hired for the occasion , but i trust it will answer the purpose ;
late of this parish .
it was settled that i should stay there all the rest of the day , and return to the hotel at night , and to london to-morrow .
understand , that i express no opinion , one way or other , on the trust i undertake .
as to this case , if you will have scratches , we say that , for anything we know , you may have accounted for them , assuming for the sake of argument that you have not invented them ?
“ what can the boy mean ?
“ miss havisham sent for me , sir , ” i explained .
“ who taught me to be hard ?
but it was only a sheep-bell .
now , if i could have believed that she favoured drummle with any idea of making me me wretched , i should have been in better heart about it ;
one night i was sitting in the chimney corner with my slate , expending great efforts on the production of a letter to joe .
i had never thought of being ashamed of my hands before ;
“ say rather , i should not be ;
” meaning me .
but i held to it , and the harder it was , the stronger i held , for i was determined , and my mind firm made up .
still determined , on my account , to come at everything by degrees .
“ no , pip .
“ or mine , ” said the other , gruffly .
“ person with him !
“ good day , pip , ” said mr jaggers , offering his hand ;
“ why , of course , my dear boy , ” returned herbert , in a tone of surprise , and again bending forward to get a nearer look at me .
” said mrs joe , throwing down the shilling and catching up the paper .
“ i will never stir from your side , ” said i , “ when i am suffered to be near you .
“ indeed , it would be hard to say too much for him , ” said i ;
the other , always working and working his dry lips and turning his eyes restlessly about him far and near , did at last turn them for a moment on the speaker , with the words , “ you are not much to look at , ” and with a half-taunting glance at the bound hands .
gargery .’ she mayn’t have know’d , ” added joe , with an appearance of reflection , “ whether it were joe , or jorge .
you’ve given trouble enough for one night , i hope !
“ where have you been , you young monkey ?
before a week was out , i received a note from wemmick , dated walworth , stating that he hoped he had made some advance in that matter appertaining to our private and personal capacities , and that he would be glad if i could come and see him again upon it .
thereupon , i had brought in all our hammers , one after another , but without avail .
you’ll hardly believe what i am going to tell you .
nothing that he wore then fitted him or seemed to belong to him ;
mr pocket took me into the house and showed me my room :
i saw that his delicacy was avoiding the right word , so i said , “ a clerk .
i tried to decline taking the guinea on the first occasion , but with no better effect than causing her to ask me very angrily , if i expected more ?
when my sister found that biddy was very quick to understand her , this mysterious sign reappeared on the slate .
if we all did what we undertake to do , as faithfully as herbert did , we might live in a republic of the virtues .
when i had got into bed , and lay there footsore , weary , and wretched , i found that i could no more close my own eyes than i could close the eyes of this foolish argus .
that all the arrangements with him should be concluded that monday night ;
“ i communicated to magwitch in new south wales when he first wrote to me from new south wales the caution that he must not expect me ever to deviate from the strict line of fact .
when mr wopsle had imparted to me all that he could recall or i extract , and when i had treated him to a little appropriate refreshment , after the fatigues of the evening , we parted .
mr wopsle , conceding his fin with a gracious dignity , was immediately shoved into a dusty corner , while everybody danced a hornpipe ;
georgiana , whom i had seen at miss havisham’s on the same occasion , also turned up .
is that so , mr gargery ?
as to took up on suspicion , that was twice or three times in the four or five year that it lasted ;
” there was a knot of three men and two women standing at a corner , and one of the women was crying on her dirty shawl , and the other comforted her by saying , as she pulled her own shawl over her shoulders , “ jaggers is for him , ’melia , and what more could you have ?
i nodded at the old gentleman as wemmick himself might have nodded , and we went in and sat down by the fireside .
it was a smooth way of going on , perhaps , in respect of saving trouble ;
yet i think i should .
” said i .
but in regard to wisiting miss havisham .
joe and i being fellow-sufferers , and having confidences as such , joe imparted a confidence to me , the moment i raised the latch of the door and peeped in at him opposite to it , sitting in the chimney corner .
“ it’s five-and-twenty pound .
then miss skiffins shut up and john tumbled open ;
he told me that he believed himself to have gone under the keel of the steamer , and to have been struck on the head in rising .
and , as soon as we got there , dinner was served .
it was not in the first few moments that i saw all these things , though i saw more of them in the first moments than might be supposed .
estella was the inspiration of it , and the heart of it , of course .
“ don’t say fit for nothing .
but i loved joe , perhaps for no better reason in those early days than because the dear fellow let me love him , and , as to him , my inner self was not so easily composed .
as speed was not our object , we should make way enough .
“ what , ” said i to herbert , when he was safe in another chair , “ what is to be done ?
be good deserve it and abide by mr jaggers’s instructions .
“ i am sure i have every reason to say so .
” said i .
“ now , handel , ” herbert replied , in his gay , hopeful way , “ it seems to me that in the despondency of the tender passion , we are looking into our gift-horse’s mouth with a magnifying-glass .
i could trace out where every part of the old house had been , and where the brewery had been , and where the gates , and where the casks .
when will you come to london ?
a fire had been lately kindled in the damp old-fashioned grate , and it was more disposed to go out than to burn up , and the reluctant smoke which hung in the room seemed colder than the clearer air , like our own marsh mist .
” sounded in my ears .
your acceptance of it , and your observance of it as binding , is the only remaining condition that i am charged with , by the person from whom i take my instructions , and for whom i am not otherwise responsible .
mr and mrs pocket had a toady neighbour ;
“ i know that lady , ” said herbert , across the table , when the toast had been honoured .
he’ll be eighty-two next birthday .
the crisp air , the sunlight , the movement on the river , and the moving river itself , the road that ran with us , seeming to sympathise with us , animate us , and encourage us on , freshened me with new hope .
this lady’s name was mrs coiler , and i had the honour of taking her down to dinner on the day of my installation .
the sound was curiously flawed by the wind ;
my answer was , that i had heard of the name .
this occasioned its terrors to be received derisively .
the chair that provis had occupied still remaining where it had stood , for he had a barrack way with him of hanging about one spot , in one unsettled manner , and going through one round of observances with his pipe and his negro-head and his jackknife and his pack of cards , and what not , as if it were all put down for him on a slate , i say his chair remaining where it had stood , herbert unconsciously took it , but next moment started out of it , pushed it away , and took another .
more than that ;
he had already locked up his safe , and made preparations for going home .
with this assistant , i went down to the boat again , and we all came ashore , and brought out the oars , and rudder and boat-hook , and all else , and hauled her up for the night .
there’s a young man hid with me , in comparison with which young man i am a angel .
“ is it indeed ?
“ educating for a lady ;
and now , indeed , i felt as if my last anchor were loosening its hold , and i should soon be driving with the winds and waves .
he had been at his books when i had found myself staring at him , and i now saw that he was inky .
and when it come to speech-making , warn’t it compeyson as could speak to ’em wi’ his face dropping every now and then into his white pocket-handkercher , ah !
estella smiled with perfect composure , and said she had no doubt of my having been quite right , and of her having been very disagreeable .
i lived in a state of chronic uneasiness respecting my behaviour to joe .
but , in this separation , i associate you only with the good ;
mr pocket was out lecturing ;
” she looked at me , and looked at sarah , and sarah’s countenance wrung out of her watchful face a cruel smile .
“ i would rather you told , joe .
“ ah !
for , how best to check this growing change in joe was a great perplexity to my remorseful thoughts .
“ he rested pretty quiet till it might want a few minutes of five , and then he starts up with a scream , and screams out , here she is !
the privilege of calling her by her name and hearing her call me by mine became , under the circumstances an aggravation of my trials ;
“ you know you must say yes ;
“ sarah pocket , ” returned cousin raymond , “ if a man is not his own neighbour , who is ?
it was beginning to rain fast .
“ swine , ” pursued mr wopsle , in his deepest voice , and pointing his fork at my blushes , as if he were mentioning my christian name , “ swine were the companions of the prodigal .
i am extremely sorry to see this in you , biddy , ” i repeated .
plenty of subjects going about , for them that know how to put salt upon their tails .
and when i says to compeyson , once out of this court , i’ll smash that face of yourn !’ ain’t it compeyson as prays the judge to be protected , and gets two turnkeys stood betwixt us ?
she gave me her hand .
she was on this side of my pillow , on that , at the head of the bed , at the foot , behind the half-opened door of the dressing-room , in the dressing-room , in the room overhead , in the room beneath , everywhere .
then , drummle glanced at me , with an insolent triumph on his great-jowled face that cut me to the heart , dull as he was , and so exasperated me , that i felt inclined to take him in my arms (as the robber in the story-book is said to have taken the old lady) and seat him on the fire .
if i had cried before , i should have had joe with me then .
and i think he added in a lower growl , that we might both go to the devil and shake ourselves .
“ they put in with a stone two-gallon jar for some beer .
joe’s station and influence were something feebler (if possible) when there was company than when there was none .
and my terror was greatest of all when i found no figure there .
“ i’ll accept the will for the deed , ” said wemmick .
i had again left my boat at the wharf below bridge ;
follow her up , joseph !
as to the strange man ;
“ living , joe ?
poor fellow !
“ you must have observed , gentlemen , ” said he , “ an ignorant and a blatant ass , with a rasping throat and a countenance expressive of low malignity , who went through i will not say sustained the rôle (if i may use a french expression) of claudius , king of denmark .
the strange man , after glancing at joe , and seeing that his attention was otherwise engaged , nodded to me again when i had taken my seat , and then rubbed his leg in a very odd way , as it struck me .
at such a time i found out for certain that this bleak place overgrown with nettles was the churchyard ;
we’d be puzzled to be more quiet and easy-going than we are at present .
“ i have been thinking , joe , that when i go down town on monday , and order my new clothes , i shall tell the tailor that i’ll come and put them on there , or that i’ll have them sent to mr pumblechook’s .
further , one of those two was already retaken , and had not freed himself of his iron .
“ he came faithfully , and he brought me the two one-pound notes .
there was a reasonably good path now , mostly on the edge of the river , with a divergence here and there where a dike came , with a miniature windmill on it and a muddy sluice-gate .
“ why , if it ain’t your footstool !
“ never you mind , ” retorted drummle .
what with the birthday visitors , and what with the cards , and what with the fight , my stay had lasted so long , that when i neared home the light on the spit of sand off the point on the marshes was gleaming against a black night-sky , and joe’s furnace was flinging a path of fire across the road .
i am far from being sure that i might not have astonished our small congregation by resorting to this extreme measure , but for its being christmas day and no sunday .
he mentioned to me as a secret , that he is courting a young lady who has , as no doubt you are aware , a bedridden pa .
“ miss estella .
“ but every man ought to know his own business best .
“ hear me out , but if i were to remove joe into a higher sphere , as i shall hope to remove him when i fully come into my property , they would hardly do him justice .
” asked biddy , timidly .
therefore he spoke very little .
he shook his head when i then asked him if she had recovered .
after favouring them with some heads of that discourse , he remarked that he considered the subject of the day’s homily , ill chosen ;
why , he is a common labouring-boy !
“ is he living ?
and biddy , her word were , go to him , without loss of time .’ that , ” said joe , summing up with his judicial air , “ were the word of biddy .
or lend him , at all events .
i know i have done nothing to raise myself in life , and that fortune alone has raised me ;
” said drummle .
” and i nodded at the old gentleman until it is no figure of speech to declare that i absolutely could not see him .
do you know , or do you not know , that the law of england supposes every man to be innocent , until he is proved proved to be guilty ?
upon this clara said to herbert , “ papa wants me , darling !
chapter viii .
” asked my sister , laughing .
be that as it may , he had directed mrs pocket to be brought up from her cradle as one who in the nature of things must marry a title , and who was to be guarded from the acquisition of plebeian domestic knowledge .
i only want you to do well , and to be comfortable .
“ are you very unhappy now ?
“ ah !
“ too true .
“ he thinks , ” said the landlord , a weakly meditative man with a pale eye , who seemed to rely greatly on his jack , “ he thinks they was , what they wasn’t .
he was good-looking too .
it would all come out in good time , i observed , and in the meanwhile nothing was to be said , save that i had come into great expectations from a mysterious patron .
“ if there ain’t baby !
the gluttony of swine is put before us , as an example to the young .
and why , do you suppose , above all things , pip , she left that cool four thousand unto him ?
” i asked him .
“ little more than skin and bone !
“ sir , ” returned mr wopsle , “ without having the honour of your acquaintance , i do say guilty .
by that time the river had lifted us a little , so that we could see above the bank .
all the while knowing the madness of my heart to be so very mad and misplaced , that i was quite conscious it would have served my face right , if i had lifted it up by my hair , and knocked it against the pebbles as a punishment for belonging to such an idiot .
but i don’t know how long the rafters may hold .
can you doubt , if there is but one in it , which is the one , and , if there is two in it , which is much the worst one ?’ and such-like .
” put the case that this was done , and that the woman was cleared .
there was nobody but himself , he intimated , worthy of my confidence , and in short , might he ?
that he had long iron-grey hair .
” cried joe , falling back in the greatest amazement .
enclosed in the letter was a receipt for the debt and costs on which i had been arrested .
we had not yet made any allusion to my change of fortune , nor did i know how much of my late history he was acquainted with .
he seemed to have hurt himself very much , for he gave another furious roar .
and you’ll judge at supper what sort of a salad i can raise .
there may be black ingratitude in the thing , and the punishment may be retributive and well deserved ;
it would be blame to me and not praise , if i had .
“ now , herbert , ” said i , “ with reference to gaining some knowledge of his history .
“ two one pound notes .
and the jolly bargemen might take it as a compliment .
“ you naughty child , how dare you ?
anything you like .
” said i .
“ i’ll sit next you myself .
i said i could manage it , would manage it , and he was so very much pleased by my acquiescence , that i was pleased too .
his personal recognition of each successive client was comprised in a nod , and in his settling his hat a little easier on his head with both hands , and then tightening the post-office , and putting his hands in his pockets .
the sheep stopped in their eating and looked timidly at us ;
” said mr jaggers , turning to the man , who was pulling a lock of hair in the middle of his forehead , like the bull in cock robin pulling at the bell-rope ;
that abject hypocrite , pumblechook , nodded again , and said , with a patronizing laugh , “ it’s more than that , mum .
his expression was , a round score o’ year ago , and a’most directly after i took up wi’ compeyson .’ how old were you when you came upon him in the little churchyard ?
“ in heaven’s name , ” said i , firing in spite of myself , “ what does it matter to you where i am going ?
“ pip is that hearty welcome , ” said joe , “ to go free with his services , to honour and fortun’ , as no words can tell him .
at length , one evening when dinner was over and i had dropped into a slumber quite worn out , for my nights had been agitated and my rest broken by fearful dreams , i was roused by the welcome footstep on the staircase .
” with an impatient movement of the fingers of her right hand ;
we are all attention , aged one .
i’ll beat the shivers so far , i’ll bet you .
betimes in the morning i was up and out .
never has that curtain dropped so heavy and blank , as when my way in life lay stretched out straight before me through the newly entered road of apprenticeship to joe .
as i was loitering along the high street , looking in disconsolately at the shop windows , and thinking what i would buy if i were a gentleman , who should come out of the bookshop but mr wopsle .
still , i love you .
“ i’ll tell you , mr pip .
mithter jaggerth mithter !
“ i have been speaking to mrs hubble , and i am going to her to-morrow .
“ i told you you’d get on .
now that we were out upon the dismal wilderness where they little thought i had been within eight or nine hours and had seen both men hiding , i considered for the first time , with great dread , if we should come upon them , would my particular convict suppose that it was i who had brought the soldiers there ?
” upon which mrs pocket laughed and said , “ thank you , flopson , ” and settling herself in one chair only , resumed her book .
i am not over-particular .
what have i done !
thus , we walked through wemmick’s greenhouse , until he turned to me and said , “ notice the man i shall shake hands with .
” biddy instantly taking the cleverest charge of her as though she had studied her from infancy ;
“ goodness knows , uncle pumblechook , ” said my sister (grasping the money) , “ we’re deeply beholden to you .
i got rid of my injured feelings for the time by kicking them into the brewery wall , and twisting them out of my hair , and then i smoothed my face with my sleeve , and came from behind the gate .
“ was that when we had a difference of opinion ?
you get at your mouth better (which after all is the object) , and you save a good deal of the attitude of opening oysters , on the part of the right elbow .
“ and last of all , pip , and this i want to say very serious to you , old chap , i see so much in my poor mother , of a woman drudging and slaving and breaking her honest hart and never getting no peace in her mortal days , that i’m dead afeerd of going wrong in the way of not doing what’s right by a woman , and i’d fur rather of the two go wrong the t’other way , and be a little ill-conwenienced myself .
” a certain dark-complexioned swab , however , who wouldn’t fill , or do anything else that was proposed to him , and whose heart was openly stated (by the boatswain) to be as black as his figure-head , proposed to two other swabs to get all mankind into difficulties ;
and now let me have a look at my gentleman agen .
i thought he was gone , when he came back , calling for a light for the cigar in his mouth , which he had forgotten .
he started , made a short run , and stopped and looked over his shoulder .
one lived in fountain court , and the other two lived in the lane , and he had seen them all go home .
whereupon i made him the extreme reply that i believed he knew where i was to be found .
there was nothing very surprising in that ;
“ something to drink ?
” replied orlick , sending his glance all round him with an air of injury .
“ yes , ” i assented .
“ will soon come to london , ” said i , after casting about for a precise form of words , “ or summon me anywhere else ?
” exclaimed miss havisham .
mr jaggers looked at me inquiringly , and repeated “ mother ?
indeed that was their only reliable quality besides larceny .
if i had had ample time for consideration , i believe i should still have gone .
likewise you’re a oncommon scholar .
mrs joe , who always took explanations upon herself , said , snappishly , “ escaped .
herbert had sometimes said to me that he found it pleasant to stand at one of our windows after dark , when the tide was running down , and to think that it was flowing , with everything it bore , towards clara .
” was mrs joe’s christmas salutation , when i and my conscience showed ourselves .
she sends you her regard .
i was , and i am , sensible that the air of this chamber , in its strong combination of stable with soup-stock , might have led one to infer that the coaching department was not doing well , and that the enterprising proprietor was boiling down the horses for the refreshment department .
with some vague misgiving that she might get upon the table then and there and die at once , the complete realisation of the ghastly waxwork at the fair , i shrank under her touch .
miss havisham , with her head in her hands , sat making a low moaning , and swaying herself on her chair , but gave no answer .
and although she was perfectly incomprehensible to me , i entertained an impression that there would be something coarse and treacherous in my dragging her as she really was (to say nothing of miss estella) before the contemplation of mrs joe .
as the time approached i should have liked to run away , but the avenger pursuant to orders was in the hall , and presently i heard joe on the staircase .
partly , to keep myself upon it ;
but there was a quantity of chalk about our country , and perhaps the people neglected no opportunity of turning it to account .
resenting this little success more than anything , drummle , without any threat or warning , pulled his hands out of his pockets , dropped his round shoulders , swore , took up a large glass , and would have flung it at his adversary’s head , but for our entertainer’s dexterously seizing it at the instant when it was raised for that purpose .
i bred her and educated her , to be loved .
“ you bring me , to-morrow morning early , that file and them wittles .
” i said .
they had never troubled me before , but they troubled me now , as vulgar appendages .
i was speaking of provis .
and it’s impossible to say what he couldn’t get , if he gave his mind to it .
put the case that he took her in , and that he kept down the old , wild , violent nature whenever he saw an inkling of its breaking out , by asserting his power over her in the old way .
“ you have been accustomed to see him often , i suppose ?
but that poor dream , as i once used to call it , has all gone by , biddy , all gone by !
he was very communicative last night , and told me more of his life .
it was the afternoon coach by which i had taken my place , and , as winter had now come round , i should not arrive at my destination until two or three hours after dark .
“ and how much money is wanting to complete the purchase ?
“ i have often thought of you , ” said estella .
i took her hand in mine , and we went out of the ruined place ;
and stop we presently did , in a gloomy street , at certain offices with an open door , whereon was painted mr .
she had no need ;
he said , “ not at all , ” and resumed .
” said i .
i heard her .
“ tell me in my ear , ” said miss havisham , bending down .
then he fell into such unaccountable fits of meditation , with his fork midway between his plate and his mouth ;
“ so , ” said my convict , turning his eyes on joe in a moody manner , and without the least glance at me , “ so you’re the blacksmith , are you ?
“ pip , ” said estella , casting her glance over the room , “ don’t be foolish about its effect on you .
meanwhile , mr waldengarver , in a frightful perspiration , was trying to get himself out of his princely sables .
it opened to the ground , and looked into a most miserable corner of the neglected garden , upon a rank ruin of cabbage-stalks , and one box-tree that had been clipped round long ago , like a pudding , and had a new growth at the top of it , out of shape and of a different colour , as if that part of the pudding had stuck to the saucepan and got burnt .
and when he gave out the psalm , always giving the whole verse , he looked all round the congregation first , as much as to say , “ you have heard my friend overhead ;
“ and never see her again , though she is so pretty ?
at such times as when your sister is on the ram-page , pip , ” joe sank his voice to a whisper and glanced at the door , “ candour compels fur to admit that she is a buster .
the whole of the danish nobility were in attendance ;
“ begin again , and let me look at something else .
“ dear joe , have you heard what becomes of her property ?
keep as clear of him as you can .
but after a little while i seemed to have the whole flats to myself .
“ mind !
“ joe , ” i interrupted , pettishly , “ how can you call me , sir ?
“ boy , be forever grateful to all friends , but especially unto them which brought you up by hand !
involuntarily i looked round me , as i was accustomed to look round me when i went home ;
but it warn’t old orlick as did it ;
i had not told him exactly when i meant to leave , and was not likely to shake hands with him again before departing .
for anything i knew , his animosity towards the man might otherwise lead to his seeking him out and rushing on his own destruction .
“ how are you living ?
“ what can you do ?’ says compeyson .
“ i am surprised , matthew , that you should expose me to the affront of interference .
so , having come there against my inclination , i went on against it .
he keeps them on shelves over his head , and will weigh them all .
when he felt his case unusually serious , and that he positively must find an opening , he would go on ’change at a busy time , and walk in and out , in a kind of gloomy country dance figure , among the assembled magnates .
thus , bentley drummle had come to mr pocket when he was a head taller than that gentleman , and half a dozen heads thicker than most gentlemen .
if she wounds you , love her .
punctual to my appointment , i rang at the castle gate on the monday morning , and was received by wemmick himself , who struck me as looking tighter than usual , and having a sleeker hat on .
his sufferings were hailed with the greatest joy by a knot of spectators , and i felt utterly confounded .
and i looked about me now .
as we were going back together to london by the midday coach , and as i breakfasted under such terrors of pumblechook that i could scarcely hold my cup , this gave me an opportunity of saying that i wanted a walk , and that i would go on along the london road while mr jaggers was occupied , if he would let the coachman know that i would get into my place when overtaken .
while my mind was thus engaged , i thought of the beautiful young estella , proud and refined , coming towards me , and i thought with absolute abhorrence of the contrast between the jail and her .
here , the daylight reappeared , and i found myself in a small paved courtyard , the opposite side of which was formed by a detached dwelling-house , that looked as if it had once belonged to the manager or head clerk of the extinct brewery .
“ you mean stole , ” said the sergeant .
utterly preposterous as his cravat was , and as his collars were , i was conscious of a sort of dignity in the look .
the lull had a sedative and philosophical influence on joe , who followed me out into the road to say , as a parting observation that might do me good , “ on the rampage , pip , and off the rampage , pip :
when i ran home from the churchyard , the forge was shut up , and joe was sitting alone in the kitchen .
“ look at her so hard and thankless , on the hearth where she was reared !
joe and biddy would never know how sorry i had been that night , none would ever know what i had suffered , how true i had meant to be , what an agony i had passed through .
“ i want diversion , and i have done with men and women .
then you must get him out of england before you stir a finger to extricate yourself .
we shut our outer door on these solemn occasions , in order that we might not be interrupted .
but which she could not have got through and kept her hands out of ;
yes .
with these fears upon me , i began either to imagine or recall that i had had mysterious warnings of this man’s approach .
dinner was laid in the best of these rooms ;
offering me a breadth of choice , as usual , between a hundred times and once .
” said he .
from my point of view , he was the wrong twin all the time , and only externally like the wemmick of walworth .
go , pip .
when we had conversed for a while , miss havisham sent us two out to walk in the neglected garden :
“ the last time .
“ and you remember that we came up with the two in a ditch , and that there was a scuffle between them , and that one of them had been severely handled and much mauled about the face by the other ?
he lighted the candle from the flaring match with great deliberation , and dropped the match , and trod it out .
“ should you , pip ?
“ a wild beast tamed , you called her .
i was disappointed to find that the day was a holiday ;
it’s a sad picter , to reflect that she’s no longer equal to fully understanding the honour .
how long we might have remained in this ridiculous position it is impossible to say , but for the incursion of three thriving farmers laid on by the waiter , i think who came into the coffee-room unbuttoning their great-coats and rubbing their hands , and before whom , as they charged at the fire , we were obliged to give way .
and whereas i wondered at this , at first , i soon began to understand that the cause of it was in me , and that the fault of it was all mine .
this individual , who , either in his own person or in that of some member of his family , seemed to be always in trouble (which in that place meant newgate) , called to announce that his eldest daughter was taken up on suspicion of shoplifting .
how dared you to come betwixt me and a young woman i liked ?
” asked mr pumblechook .
sometimes lying on the bank , wrapped in our coats , and sometimes moving about to warm ourselves , until we saw our boat coming round .
” every christmas day , he retorted , as he now retorted , “ it’s no more than your merits .
“ they are mounting up , handel , ” herbert would say ;
the debate upon it grew so lively , indeed , that at least six more honourable members told six more , during the discussion , that they believed they knew where they were to be found .
“ good day .
the judicious parent , having nothing to bestow or withhold but his blessing , had handsomely settled that dower upon them after a short struggle , and had informed mr pocket that his wife was “ a treasure for a prince .
but he was down on the rank wet grass , filing at his iron like a madman , and not minding me or minding his own leg , which had an old chafe upon it and was bloody , but which he handled as roughly as if it had no more feeling in it than the file .
then , and after that , i took it .
three or four times i feebly thought i would start conversation ;
yes .
, was painted on the door , and there was a label on the letter-box , “ return shortly .
at first , i kept above blackfriars bridge ;
the murdered person was a woman , a woman a good ten years older , very much larger , and very much stronger .
“ they are your friends , ” said miss havisham .
the way by which we approached it took us past the three jolly bargemen , which we were surprised to find it being eleven o’clock in a state of commotion , with the door wide open , and unwonted lights that had been hastily caught up and put down scattered about .
i inquired was it a large household she was going to be a member of ?
and miss skiffins’s brother , the accountant , going straight to clarriker’s and bringing clarriker to me , i had the great satisfaction of concluding that arrangement .
the abhorrence in which i held the man , the dread i had of him , the repugnance with which i shrank from him , could not have been exceeded if he had been some terrible beast .
“ you with a uncle too !
it was the sole resource ;
i would then take a sheet of paper , and write across the top of it , in a neat hand , the heading , “ memorandum of pip’s debts ” ;
and the dear old home-voice answered , “ which it air , old chap .
now , easing a belt or a pouch ;
“ what was the name he gave me before the base man who swore to defend me ?
the sergeant , a decisive man , ordered that the sound should not be answered , but that the course should be changed , and that his men should make towards it “ at the double .
it fell out as wemmick had told me it would , that i had an early opportunity of comparing my guardian’s establishment with that of his cashier and clerk .
” he said , “ i was , and got convicted .
my rapid mind pursued him to the town , made a picture of the street with him in it , and contrasted its lights and life with the lonely marsh and the white vapour creeping over it , into which i should have dissolved .
and i might have gone , my dear herbert , but for the prospect of taking counsel with your friendship and affection .
“ mrs whimple , ” said herbert , when i told him so , “ is the best of housewives , and i really do not know what my clara would do without her motherly help .
“ wemmick , ” said i , “ do you remember telling me , before i first went to mr jaggers’s private house , to notice that housekeeper ?
but , yes , if you like .
“ the one who had been mauled , ” he answered readily , “ and i’ll swear i saw him !
“ dear pip , ” said biddy , “ you are sure you don’t fret for her ?
come on your birthday .
my pleasure ’ull be fur to see him do it .
while he was gone , i sat down on my usual stool and looked vacantly at my sister , feeling pretty sure that the man would not be there .
i came here to take leave of it before its change .
it happened on two or three occasions in my presence , that his desperate reputation was alluded to by one or other of the people in attendance on him .
what was it ?
“ that’s true , ” said estella , with a cold careless smile that always chilled me .
when i raised my eyes again , i found that he had been shrewdly looking at me all the time , and was doing so still .
old orlick he’s been a bustin’ open a dwelling-ouse .
the dreadful condition to which he was brought , was so appalling to both of us , that we could not refer to it in plainer words .
“ nothing .
shall colonists have their horses (and blood ’uns , if you please , good lord !) and not my london gentleman ?
there was a bar at the jolly bargemen , with some alarmingly long chalk scores in it on the wall at the side of the door , which seemed to me to be never paid off .
i give pirrip as my father’s family name , on the authority of his tombstone and my sister , mrs joe gargery , who married the blacksmith .
mrs joe was prodigiously busy in getting the house ready for the festivities of the day , and joe had been put upon the kitchen doorstep to keep him out of the dust-pan , an article into which his destiny always led him , sooner or later , when my sister was vigorously reaping the floors of her establishment .
bear that in mind , will you ?
you made your own snares .
a dread possessed me that when i least expected it , the file would reappear .
joe laid his hand upon my shoulder with the touch of a woman .
miss pocket laughed , and camilla laughed and said (checking a yawn) , “ the idea !
i should have liked him to have betrayed emotion , or to have said , “ it does you credit , pip , ” or something of that sort .
” like and order to dogs , again saw the wicked noah’s ark lying out on the black water .
don’t let anything happen to the portable property .
in which the dear fellow looked natural , and like the man he was .
i had had load enough upon my mind before the receipt of this strange letter .
“ and only he ?
“ once for all .
no half measures with me .
as i declined the proposal on the plea of an appointment , he was so good as to take me into a yard and show me where the gallows was kept , and also where people were publicly whipped , and then he showed me the debtors’ door , out of which culprits came to be hanged ;
i think if she had done such a deed she would be safer where she was .
“ you know the name ?
similarly she mightn’t .
she uttered the word with an eager look , and with strong emphasis , and with a weird smile that had a kind of boast in it .
the baby was the soul of honour , and protested with all its might .
not to get up a mystery with these people , i resolved to announce in the morning that my uncle had unexpectedly come from the country .
but i was capable of almost any meanness towards joe or his name .
they’ll soon go .
“ do you know where you saw it afore ?
once , i had been taken to one of our old marsh churches to see a skeleton in the ashes of a rich dress that had been dug out of a vault under the church pavement .
i was about to excuse myself , as being but a bad companion just then , when wemmick anticipated me .
for i was afraid to look at him just then , lest mr jaggers’s sharpness should detect that there had been some communication unknown to him between us .
“ i wouldn’t wish to be stiff company , ” said joe .
“ says you , joseph , he gave me a little message , which i will now repeat .
her chest had dropped , so that she stooped ;
am i right in so understanding what you have told me , as that he never referred to her , directly or indirectly , in any way ?
“ pip’s a gentleman of fortun’ then , ” said joe , “ and god bless him in it !
“ what floor do you want ?
you may read the lord’s prayer backwards , if you like , and , perhaps , have done it before to-day .
“ no , ” said i .
” for i looked surprised , “ it’s not personal ;
“ you take it smoothly now , ” said i , “ but you were very serious last night , when you swore it was death .
i wish there warn’t no tickler for you , old chap ;
that there were , still living , people enough who were able and willing to identify him , i could not doubt .
we are in a banker’s-parcel case just at present , and i have been down the road taking a squint at the scene of action , and thereupon must have a word or two with our client .
for this reason , i resolved to alight as soon as we touched the town , and put myself out of his hearing .
i believe they were fat , though i was at that time undersized for my years , and not strong .
“ don’t you see ?
and that the distant savage lair from which the wind was rushing was the sea ;
“ once habituated to his distrustful manner , ” said i , “ i have done very well .
“ orlick there ?
i had no grain of hope left .
this account gave me great joy , as it perfected the only good thing i had done .
on the contrary , it would have been better , for his preservation would then have naturally and tenderly addressed my heart .
“ mrs camels , ” by which i presently understood he meant camilla , “ she have five pound fur to buy rushlights to put her in spirits when she wake up in the night .
” and then , “ when she first came , i meant to save her from misery like mine .
” that , they were all in excellent spirits on the road home , and sang , o lady fair !
and i could only wear my coat like a cloak , loose over my shoulders and fastened at the neck .
“ but when i fell into the mistake i have so long remained in , at least you led me on ?
“ i follow you , sir .
he flared the candle at me again , smoking my face and hair , and for an instant blinding me , and turned his powerful back as he replaced the light on the table .
as estella dealt the cards , i glanced at the dressing-table again , and saw that the shoe upon it , once white , now yellow , had never been worn .
“ i know it , herbert , ” said i , with my head still turned away , “ but i can’t help it .
say this day week .
the cold wind seemed to blow colder there than outside the gate ;
and as i came up , one of the two warders (the postboy) knocked at the door , implying that i was far too much exhausted by grief to have strength remaining to knock for myself .
she could not get over my appearance , and was in the last degree confounded .
“ there’s a nod for you ;
and when i had finished it and sent it in , i wrote out other petitions to such men in authority as i hoped were the most merciful , and drew up one to the crown itself .
“ in miss havisham’s room .
the furniture was all very solid and good , like his watch-chain .
“ well , then , understand once for all that i never shall or can be comfortable or anything but miserable there , biddy !
“ remember ?
now , master !
as he looked at the fire , i thought i saw a cunning expression , followed by a half-laugh , come into his face .
occasionally , he shot himself out of his equipage headforemost over the apron ;
up to this time i had remained standing , not to disguise that i wished him gone .
” and ran away .
“ what she giv’ , ” said joe , “ she giv’ to his friends .
still , in my desire to be wiser , i got this composition by heart with the utmost gravity ;
don’t be too eager .
while dry rot and wet rot and all the silent rots that rot in neglected roof and cellar , rot of rat and mouse and bug and coaching-stables near at hand besides addressed themselves faintly to my sense of smell , and moaned , “ try barnard’s mixture .
it was an unhappy life that i lived ;
when that person discloses , my part in this business will cease and determine .
i could think of nothing better to say than “ i am glad you think so , joe .
as i was saying , pip , it were my intentions to have had it cut over him ;
” i asked , after again considering the subject .
for once you are right .
i had done so , and was looking along the desolate garden walk , when i beheld a solitary figure in it .
“ much of that !
why , if i see one pursuing party last night coming up in order , damn ’em , with their tramp , tramp i see a hundred .
she would far rather have wounded her own breast than mine .
“ even if i was forced to halt here nigh two hours , that’ll do .
my sister was uncommonly lively on the present occasion , and indeed was generally more gracious in the society of mrs hubble than in other company .
it was completely done , however , and when we were going out of church wemmick took the cover off the font , and put his white gloves in it , and put the cover on again .
it was that , in my being brought low , he saw the finger of providence .
any way , i could scarcely be withheld from going out to gerrard street that night .
nor , how i should undoubtedly have gone , if my time had been my own , to come back .
certain wintry branches of candles on the high chimney-piece faintly lighted the chamber ;
“ for i’ve been sea-tossed and sea-washed , months and months .
they ain’t so easy concerning me here , dear boy , wouldn’t be , leastwise , if they knowed where i was .
” joe demanded .
i took the indentures out of his hand and gave them to miss havisham .
he did this so that nobody but i saw the file ;
hem !
” said the convict i had never seen .
“ yes .
my sister , mrs joe gargery , was more than twenty years older than i , and had established a great reputation with herself and the neighbours because she had brought me up “ by hand .
” he tilted me again .
“ no , ” said joe ;
” on that , mr jaggers said , triumphantly , “ i thought we should come to it !
” i asked him .
i admit nothing .
“ you have always held your place in my heart , ” i answered .
“ no , no , ” said biddy , gently .
does what has passed between us give me any excuse for asking you a question relative to estella ?
this pain of the mind was much harder to strive against than any bodily pain i suffered ;
as estella looked back over her shoulder before going out at the door , miss havisham kissed that hand to her , with a ravenous intensity that was of its kind quite dreadful .
“ you know , old chap , ” said joe , looking at me , and not at mrs joe , with his bite still in his cheek , “ i bolted , myself , when i was your age frequent and as a boy i’ve been among a many bolters ;
gradually i slipped from the chair and lay on the floor .
i have no softness there , no sympathy sentiment nonsense .
may i , as an old friend and well-wisher ?
i saw him through the window , seizing his horse’s mane , and mounting in his blundering brutal manner , and sidling and backing away .
as i watched him in silence , he put his hand into the corner at his side , and took up a gun with a brass-bound stock .
” in looking at me and then laughing heartily , herbert for the time recovered his usual lively manner .
“ there is no doubt you do , ” said i , something hurriedly , “ for i have seen you give him looks and smiles this very night , such as you never give to me .
he told me in a whisper that they had gone down fiercely locked in each other’s arms , and that there had been a struggle under water , and that he had disengaged himself , struck out , and swum away .
“ what do you want ?
when my ablutions were completed , i was put into clean linen of the stiffest character , like a young penitent into sackcloth , and was trussed up in my tightest and fearfullest suit .
“ there’s another for you ;
joe had got his coat and waistcoat and cravat off , and his leather apron on , and passed into the forge .
and why ?
“ and air you a-going to joseph ?
but , i became as highly incensed by it as if it had been barbed with wit , and i immediately rose in my place and said that i could not but regard it as being like the honourable finch’s impudence to come down to that grove , we always talked about coming down to that grove , as a neat parliamentary turn of expression , down to that grove , proposing a lady of whom he knew nothing .
at last , the aged read himself into a light slumber .
at such times the more exuberant among them called out in an excited manner on our emergence round some corner of expectancy , “ here they come !
i was not expected till to-morrow ;
i could do that , if i was wanted .
looking in , i saw a lighted candle on a table , a bench , and a mattress on a truckle bedstead .
” he answered , with a grave nod , “ jaggers knows .
early next morning we went out together , and at the corner of giltspur street by smithfield , i left herbert to go his way into the city , and took my way to little britain .
” said i .
after that , he fell to gardening , and i saw him from my gothic window pretending to employ the aged , and nodding at him in a most devoted manner .
“ long enough to be tired of it , ” returned drummle , pretending to yawn , but equally determined .
and from this , and from the quantity of people standing about smelling strongly of spirits and beer , i inferred that the trials were on .
for i have my letter to satis house to write , before i go to sleep .
let us make one more round of the garden , and then go in .
but to give it you short and handy , i’ll put it at once into a mouthful of english .
“ ah !
“ a bad un , i’ll be bound , ” said mrs joe triumphantly , “ or he wouldn’t have given it to the boy !
but it either is , or it will be , or it’s in great danger of being .
“ you said just now that estella was not related to miss havisham , but adopted .
chapter xxxiv .
“ handsome would be the word , ” returned my sister .
however , her temper was greatly improved , and she was patient .
it was a dry cold night , and the wind blew keenly , and the frost was white and hard .
“ i have verified my information , and there’s an end .
“ what do you mean , belinda ?
“ nine hundred pounds .
by imperceptible degrees , as the tide ran out , we lost more and more of the nearer woods and hills , and dropped lower and lower between the muddy banks , but the tide was yet with us when we were off gravesend .
it began the moment we sat down to dinner .
and i came of age , in fulfilment of herbert’s prediction , that i should do so before i knew where i was .
“ o yes , sir !
i always thought this was business , this was the way to confront the thing , this was the way to take the foe by the throat .
no bringing up by hand then .
we went in , wemmick leaving his fishing-rod in the porch , and looked all round .
” said mr jaggers .
therefore , i had sent him the unopened pocket-book by herbert , to hold in his own keeping , and i felt a kind of satisfaction whether it was a false kind or a true , i hardly know in not having profited by his generosity since his revelation of himself .
” i drank to the new couple , drank to the aged , drank to the castle , saluted the bride at parting , and made myself as agreeable as i could .
neither were my notions of the theological positions to which my catechism bound me , at all accurate ;
“ young man , i am sorry to see you brought low .
“ i’d be a match for all noodles and all rogues , ” returned my sister , beginning to work herself into a mighty rage .
his interest in its recovery seemed to me to be much heightened when he heard that it had stockings on .
“ when there come up in his shay-cart , pumblechook .
i followed next to her , and joe came last .
all night there were coaches in my broken sleep , going to wrong places instead of to london , and having in the traces , now dogs , now cats , now pigs , now men , never horses .
very well .
and after that it gradually set in that she said innumerable times in a low solemn voice , “ what have i done !
mr drummle , i drink to you .
“ still .
mr wopsle’s great-aunt kept an evening school in the village ;
the last word was flung at the boy , who had not the least notion what it meant .
i thought how the same feeling had come back when i saw a face looking at me , and a hand waving to me from a stage-coach window ;
but , as he had no theory , and no coat on , he was unanimously set at naught , not to mention his smoking hard behind , as he stood with his back to the kitchen fire to draw the damp out :
i know nothing of days of the week ;
at length , falling off into a profound sleep from which the daylight woke me with a start .
i never had one hour’s happiness in her society , and yet my mind all round the four-and-twenty hours was harping on the happiness of having her with me unto death .
i could hardly begin but herbert must begin too , so he soon followed .
let’s see ;
“ what’ll you drink , mr ?
” said mr jaggers .
“ is this a cut ?
well ?
“ it was neither a very true nor a very polite thing to say , ” she remarked , directing her eyes to the ships again .
“ no , no , ” said herbert , “ that’s my name for him .
everybody started and looked up , as if it were the murderer .
after grinding a number of dull blades , of whom it was remarkable that their fathers , when influential , were always going to help him to preferment , but always forgot to do it when the blades had left the grindstone , he had wearied of that poor work and had come to london .
thus having one foot on the seat of the chair , and one foot on the ground .
“ who gave you leave to prowl about ?
“ are you here for good ?
oars !
while we were comforting ourselves by the fire after our meal , the jack who was sitting in a corner , and who had a bloated pair of shoes on , which he had exhibited while we were eating our eggs and bacon , as interesting relics that he had taken a few days ago from the feet of a drowned seaman washed ashore asked me if we had seen a four-oared galley going up with the tide ?
but if you would rather mr jaggers knew nothing of the matter , i will send it to you .
miss havisham’s intentions towards me , all a mere dream ;
“ my dear sir , ” said mr trabb , as he respectfully bent his body , opened his arms , and took the liberty of touching me on the outside of each elbow , “ don’t hurt me by mentioning that .
it was no laughing matter with estella now , nor was she summoning these remembrances from any shallow place .
and there were more dirty clothes and bandboxes under the beds than i should have thought the family possessed .
that part of the subject (i reminded her) involved matters which could form no part of my explanation , for they were the weighty secrets of another .
i signified that he was addressing mr pip .
wopsle , too , took pains to present me in the worst light .
am i addressing mr pip ?
beat it out , beat it out old clem !
lord strike you dead on the spot , if ever you split in any way sumever !
by the by , the guns is going again .
i kept my ears open , seeming to have them shut , until i heard that he was absent , and i thought that would be the best time for making the attempt .
the tide , beginning to run down at nine , and being with us until three , we intended still to creep on after it had turned , and row against it until dark .
then , that is why it makes me wretched .
i thank you for the question .
joe offered me more gravy , which i was afraid to take .
” asked estella of myself , with the greatest disdain .
let him ’ware them , when no man can’t find a rag of his dear relation’s clothes , nor yet a bone of his body .
and we don’t find them , easy .
as he could hear nothing but indistinct sounds of one deep rough voice (this was while my mind was so busy) , he even at last began to doubt whether i was there , when suddenly i cried out loudly , and he answered the cries , and rushed in , closely followed by the other two .
“ here i am !
“ how do you know it ?
put the case that he habitually knew of their being imprisoned , whipped , transported , neglected , cast out , qualified in all ways for the hangman , and growing up to be hanged .
for now , my repugnance to him had all melted away ;
“ don’t have too much to do with him .
“ quiet !
then my sister sealed them up in a piece of paper , and put them under some dried rose-leaves in an ornamental teapot on the top of a press in the state parlour .
” said wemmick , rubbing his hands .
and the shameful place , being all asmear with filth and fat and blood and foam , seemed to stick to me .
and then my mother she’d go out to work , and she’d say , “ joe , ” she’d say , “ now , please god , you shall have some schooling , child , ” and she’d put me to school .
i ascended it now , in lighter boots than of yore , and tapped in my old way at the door of miss havisham’s room .
” repeated my sister .
the royal phantom also carried a ghostly manuscript round its truncheon , to which it had the appearance of occasionally referring , and that too , with an air of anxiety and a tendency to lose the place of reference which were suggestive of a state of mortality .
it was evident that he had nothing around him but the simplest necessaries , for everything that i remarked upon turned out to have been sent in on my account from the coffee-house or somewhere else .
with the queerest gothic windows (by far the greater part of them sham) , and a gothic door almost too small to get in at .
my dread always was , that this knowledge on her part laid me under a heavy disadvantage with her pride , and made me the subject of a rebellious struggle in her bosom .
but it was too sour to be accepted as a sample of the beer that was gone , and in this respect i remember those recluses as being like most others .
mr wopsle , indeed , wildly cried out , “ no !
” said he .
“ told me !
we were anxious for the time when he would go to his lodging and leave us together , but he was evidently jealous of leaving us together , and sat late .
“ i think you’re another .
behave yourself .
“ bear in mind then , that brag is a good dog , but holdfast is a better .
chapter lviii .
we went down on the next day but one , and we found her in the room where i had first beheld her , and it is needless to add that there was no change in satis house .
“ is he there ?
“ it’s the young man !
this penalty of being jiggered was a favourite supposititious case of his .
i dozed off , myself , in considering the question whether i ought to restore a couple of pounds sterling to this creature before losing sight of him , and how it could best be done .
on a moderate computation , it was many months , that sunday , since i had left joe and biddy .
“ very well , ” said i , much relieved , “ then i shall look you up at walworth , you may depend upon it .
his enjoyment of the spectacle i furnished , as he sat with his arms folded on the table , shaking his head at me and hugging himself , had a malignity in it that made me tremble .
” next day was appointed for the production (lest our honour should take cold from delay) , and next day drummle appeared with a polite little avowal in estella’s hand , that she had had the honour of dancing with him several times .
you may well say churchyard , you two .
you did .
“ and that the soldiers lighted torches , and put the two in the centre , and that we went on to see the last of them , over the black marshes , with the torchlight shining on their faces , i am particular about that , with the torchlight shining on their faces , when there was an outer ring of dark night all about us ?
she’s a-coming !
” exclaimed my sister , as if she didn’t quite mean that but rather the contrary .
“ here’s a couple of pair of gloves !
good again !
to this effect the sergeant and the nearest men were speaking under their breath , when joe and i came up .
“ yes , miss havisham .
the face of trabb’s boy !
what with the cries aboard the steamer , and the furious blowing off of her steam , and her driving on , and our driving on , i could not at first distinguish sky from water or shore from shore ;
“ let them out , estella .
“ and why was old orlick there ?
it is impossible to express with what acuteness i felt the convict’s breathing , not only on the back of my head , but all along my spine .
“ it is havisham .
“ but then you’ve got to be a scholar .
“ though , look’ee here , pip’s comrade , ” he said to herbert , after having discoursed for some time , “ i know very well that once since i come back for half a minute i’ve been low .
i had often watched a large dog of ours eating his food ;
“ oh lord !
dispirited and anxious , long hoping that to-morrow or next week would clear my way , and long disappointed , i sadly missed the cheerful face and ready response of my friend .
” said miss havisham to camilla .
“ first , ” said mr jaggers , “ you should have some new clothes to come in , and they should not be working-clothes .
her reverting to this tone as if our association were forced upon us , and we were mere puppets , gave me pain ;
“ it happened happened , don’t you see ?
hold me !
after looking a little at her downcast eyes as she walked beside me , i gave up that point .
” cried my sister , casting off her bonnet in sudden desperation , “ here i stand talking to mere mooncalfs , with uncle pumblechook waiting , and the mare catching cold at the door , and the boy grimed with crock and dirt from the hair of his head to the sole of his foot !
he comes here at the peril of his life , for the realisation of his fixed idea .
“ there ain’t no need to go into it , ” he said , looking round once more .
i’ll give you punch , and not bad punch .
you’ll go down ?
i rang for the tea , and the waiter , reappearing with his magic clue , brought in by degrees some fifty adjuncts to that refreshment , but of tea not a glimpse .
i had never seen any one then , and i have never seen any one since , who more strongly expressed to me , in every look and tone , a natural incapacity to do anything secret and mean .
that she had done a grievous thing in taking an impressionable child to mould into the form that her wild resentment , spurned affection , and wounded pride found vengeance in , i knew full well .
our time of starting from the cross keys was two o’clock .
it makes me wretched that you should encourage a man so generally despised as drummle .
i was still thinking of it when i came out of the theatre an hour afterwards , and found him waiting for me near the door .
when we drove up to the blue boar after a drizzly ride , whom should i see come out under the gateway , toothpick in hand , to look at the coach , but bentley drummle !
after dinner a bottle of choice old port was placed before my guardian (he was evidently well acquainted with the vintage) , and the two ladies left us .
estella , to the last hour of my life , you cannot choose but remain part of my character , part of the little good in me , part of the evil .
drummle laughed outright , and sat laughing in our faces , with his hands in his pockets and his round shoulders raised ;
“ i have seen her mother within these three days .
without this arrest of everything , this standing still of all the pale decayed objects , not even the withered bridal dress on the collapsed form could have looked so like grave-clothes , or the long veil so like a shroud .
the striking of the clock aroused me , but not from my dejection or remorse , and i got up and had my coat fastened round my neck , and went out .
and could i look upon her without compassion , seeing her punishment in the ruin she was , in her profound unfitness for this earth on which she was placed , in the vanity of sorrow which had become a master mania , like the vanity of penitence , the vanity of remorse , the vanity of unworthiness , and other monstrous vanities that have been curses in this world ?
” said i , wondering why he could possibly want to know .
“ skin the stockings off mr waldengarver , ” said the owner of that property , “ or you’ll bust ’em .
but , the moon was a good two hours higher than when i had last seen the sky , and the night , though rainy , was much lighter .
i had never seen her shed a tear before , and , in the hope that the relief might do her good , i bent over her without speaking .
“ and i ain’t a master-mind , ” joe resumed , when he had unfixed his look , and got back to his whisker .
a change passed over mr trabb .
“ why , see now !
i resented it , because it seemed to imply that he expected me to respond to it .
and on the ground beside her , when joe picked her up , was a convict’s leg-iron which had been filed asunder .
but it’s so new here , and so strange , and so fine , and melancholy .
“ i thought he was proud , ” said i .
the fear of losing joe’s confidence , and of thenceforth sitting in the chimney corner at night staring drearily at my forever lost companion and friend , tied up my tongue .
estella took no notice of either of us , but led us the way that i knew so well .
my right hand was not so badly burnt but that i could move the fingers .
this bringing us into conversation , he was so good as to entertain me with my own story , of course with the popular feature that pumblechook was my earliest benefactor and the founder of my fortunes .
he is intent upon various new expenses , horses , and carriages , and lavish appearances of all kinds .
“ we have been , ” said mr wopsle , exalted with his late performance , “ we have been indulging , mr orlick , in an intellectual evening .
“ my good handel , so he was .
i am to have a carriage , and you are to take me .
“ dear me !
which gate did you come to ?
as to what i dare , i’m a old bird now , as has dared all manner of traps since first he was fledged , and i’m not afeerd to perch upon a scarecrow .
i was not far out , since he said , after smoking a little :
“ if you knew all my story , ” she pleaded , “ you would have some compassion for me and a better understanding of me .
we got a chair out , ready for mrs joe’s alighting , and stirred up the fire that they might see a bright window , and took a final survey of the kitchen that nothing might be out of its place .
i have reason to think that joe’s intellects were brightened by the encounter they had passed through , and that on our way to pumblechook’s he invented a subtle and deep design .
i had not the power to attend to it .
“ miss havisham , ” said joe , with a fixed look at me , like an effort of remembrance , “ made it wery partick’ler that we should give her were it compliments or respects , pip ?
that young man has a secret way pecooliar to himself , of getting at a boy , and at his heart , and at his liver .
if there’s death hid inside of it , there is , and let him come out , and i’ll face him , and then i’ll believe in him and not afore .
prosperously , but not noticeably otherwise ;
then look here .
the ringing of a distant bell , combined with the echoing of some cry or call along the passage by which i had come , interrupted the conversation and caused estella to say to me , “ now , boy !
i don’t wish it professionally spoken about .
?
it was agreed to be done ;
the darkening garden , and the lane , and the stars that were coming out , were blurred in my own sight .
what did he call me , with my husband standing by ?
at those times , i would decide conclusively that my disaffection to dear old joe and the forge was gone , and that i was growing up in a fair way to be partners with joe and to keep company with biddy , when all in a moment some confounding remembrance of the havisham days would fall upon me like a destructive missile , and scatter my wits again .
” said mr jaggers , bending forward to look at his boots and then straightening himself .
but mr wopsle said he would go , if joe would .
“ yet a gentleman may not keep a public-house ;
i therefore told him my small story , and laid stress on my being forbidden to inquire who my benefactor was .
she’s got the shroud again .
you’re dead .
and that he should be communicated with no more in any way , until we took him on board .
mr pumblechook then put me through my pence-table from “ twelve pence make one shilling , ” up to “ forty pence make three and fourpence , ” and then triumphantly demanded , as if he had done for me , “ now !
so that in my short days i always saw some miles of open country between them when i met him coming up the lane .
“ then , i have talked with wemmick , ” said i , “ and have come to tell you what caution he gave me and what advice .
it was the last self-exhausting effort of my fretfulness , for after that i slept soundly .
and it was not until i began to think , that i began fully to know how wrecked i was , and how the ship in which i had sailed was gone to pieces .
beyond town , we found a heavy mist out , and it fell wet and thick .
no more low , wet grounds , no more dikes and sluices , no more of these grazing cattle , though they seemed , in their dull manner , to wear a more respectful air now , and to face round , in order that they might stare as long as possible at the possessor of such great expectations , farewell , monotonous acquaintances of my childhood , henceforth i was for london and greatness ;
“ do you stay here long ?
finally splashing it into the slop-basin , where i took the liberty of laying hands upon it .
at my own writing-table , pushed into a corner and cumbered with little bottles , joe now sat down to his great work , first choosing a pen from the pen-tray as if it were a chest of large tools , and tucking up his sleeves as if he were going to wield a crow-bar or sledgehammer .
he seemed to have more breathing business to do than another man , and to make more noise in doing it ;
in point of meritorious character , the two things seemed about equal .
this device i executed successfully .
” we always used that name for marshes , in our country .
“ brandy , ” said i .
” which was the signal for the dip of the oars .
“ i don’t say no to that , but i meant estella .
being by this time a perfect fury and a complete success , she made a dash at the door which i had fortunately locked .
take startop .
“ i don’t know how she’s there ,’ says arthur , shivering dreadful with the horrors , but she’s standing in the corner at the foot of the bed , awful mad .
let me see you play cards with this boy .
“ dear little thing !
” mr jaggers asked , soon after we began dinner .
but i must say it now .
one day soon after the appearance of the chair , miss havisham suddenly saying to me , with the impatient movement of her fingers , “ there , there , there !
that the secret was still a secret , except that you had got wind of it .
“ when that person discloses , ” said mr jaggers , straightening himself , “ you and that person will settle your own affairs .
“ the blotchy , sprawly , sulky fellow .
deeming that a serene and unconscious contemplation of him would best beseem me , and would be most likely to quell his evil mind , i advanced with that expression of countenance , and was rather congratulating myself on my success , when suddenly the knees of trabb’s boy smote together , his hair uprose , his cap fell off , he trembled violently in every limb , staggered out into the road , and crying to the populace , “ hold me !
i saw him over your shoulder .
“ i wish i was a frog .
the boat had returned , and his guard were ready , so we followed him to the landing-place made of rough stakes and stones , and saw him put into the boat , which was rowed by a crew of convicts like himself .
she hung upon estella’s beauty , hung upon her words , hung upon her gestures , and sat mumbling her own trembling fingers while she looked at her , as though she were devouring the beautiful creature she had reared .
“ tell me as an old , old friend .
do you ?
i can recommend it for your purpose , sir , because it really is extra super .
you know what time the clocks keep here) , when i told him that i wanted a little girl to rear and love , and save from my fate .
now , rushing at it and catching it neatly as it dropped ;
i think he would not be much the better for the mother .
does any one live , who knows what set purposes you have , half as well as i do ?
but he was gone .
” said biddy .
he had a large watch-chain , and strong black dots where his beard and whiskers would have been if he had let them .
“ until you spoke to her the other day , and until i saw in you a looking-glass that showed me what i once felt myself , i did not know what i had done .
“ there is an unconscionable old shark for you !
i heerd as it were a person what sent the person what giv’ you the bank-notes at the jolly bargemen , pip .
but she presently stopped and looked at me again ;
he answered quite seriously , and used the word as if it denoted some profession .
“ now , be careful .
“ who said she knew him ?
i murmured “ certainly , ” and mr pumblechook took me by both hands again , and communicated a movement to his waistcoat , which had an emotional appearance , though it was rather low down , “ my dear young friend , rely upon my doing my little all in your absence , by keeping the fact before the mind of joseph .
“ joe , how are you , joe ?
and now , dear biddy , if you can tell me that you will go through the world with me , you will surely make it a better world for me , and me a better man for it , and i will try hard to make it a better world for you .
” said estella , with a slight wave of her hand , signifying in the fighting times .
i was rather confused , thinking it must be out of the london fashion , but said yes .
as fur as i am concerned any one’s welcome to my place .
you shall read ’em to me , dear boy !
in the front first floor , a clerk who looked something between a publican and a rat-catcher a large pale , puffed , swollen man was attentively engaged with three or four people of shabby appearance , whom he treated as unceremoniously as everybody seemed to be treated who contributed to mr jaggers’s coffers .
as my eyes followed her white hand , again the same dim suggestion that i could not possibly grasp crossed me .
he must have been a green one .
“ there you quite mistake him , ” said i .
what a liar you were !
not finding you , i went to clarriker’s to find mr herbert .
“ poor soul !
“ i am told you had a remarkable breed of tumblers .
“ first knowed mr jaggers that way .
and it was direct and clear , and evidently intended to absolve me from any suspicion of profiting by the receipt of the money .
i alluded to the advantages i had derived in my first rawness and ignorance from his society , and i confessed that i feared i had but ill repaid them , and that he might have done better without me and my expectations .
i don’t want to know anything ;
with my heart thumping like a blacksmith at joe’s broad shoulder , i looked all about for any sign of the convicts .
i’ll say no more .
” she laughed again , and even now when she had told me why , her laughter was very singular to me , for i could not doubt its being genuine , and yet it seemed too much for the occasion .
have the goodness , biddy , to tell me why .
the sergeant took a polite leave of the ladies , and parted from mr pumblechook as from a comrade ;
“ consequence , my father didn’t make objections to my going to work ;
i glanced at herbert’s home , and at his character , and at his having no means but such as he was dependent on his father for ;
you did .
“ have you brought his indentures with you ?
“ as to be sure you are a honour to your king and country .
my dear girl is with her father ;
alterations have been made in that part of the temple since that time , and it has not now so lonely a character as it had then , nor is it so exposed to the river .
come , i only want one word from you .
to help his memory i mentioned my name .
singular !
what did i tell you then , pip ?
the watchman made more light of the matter than i did , and naturally ;
” she cried , despairingly .
” i asked , with sudden gravity .
joe’s blue eyes turned a little watery ;
i was ashamed to answer him .
her countenance immediately assumed a knitted and intent expression as if she had been reading for a week , but before she could have read half a dozen lines , she fixed her eyes upon me , and said , “ i hope your mamma is quite well ?
no , he ain’t .
“ it’s not much to be particular about , ” said the sergeant ;
putting on the best clothes i had , i went into town as early as i could hope to find the shops open , and presented myself before mr trabb , the tailor , who was having his breakfast in the parlour behind his shop , and who did not think it worth his while to come out to me , but called me in to him .
plainly signifying that it was quite true , and that he despised us as asses all .
“ and biddy , we must often speak of these things , for of course i shall be often down here now .
no !
mrs j .
” wemmick’s attention being thus directed to his brooch , he put down the cast , and polished the brooch with his pocket-handkerchief .
“ make haste up , millers .
“ halloa !
“ did you send that note of miss havisham’s to mr pip , wemmick ?
“ given to government , ” said joe .
i won’t hear a word .
at startop’s suggestion , we put ourselves down for election into a club called the finches of the grove :
“ if i could only get myself to do it , that would be the thing for me .
“ i am glad you like him , sir , ” said i “ but i don’t .
no need to take the handkerchief from his neck and twist it round his head ;
the second was his dressing-room ;
as he had shown no diffidence on the subject , i ventured on the liberty of asking him the question , when he stood before me , dusting his hands .
the remains of my poor sister had been brought round by the kitchen door , and , it being a point of undertaking ceremony that the six bearers must be stifled and blinded under a horrible black velvet housing with a white border , the whole looked like a blind monster with twelve human legs , shuffling and blundering along , under the guidance of two keepers , the postboy and his comrade .
that the mother was still living .
all in good time .
vauxhall , six .
impossible !
it had seemed to me , in the many anxious considerations i had given the point , almost indifferent what port we made for , hamburg , rotterdam , antwerp , the place signified little , so that he was out of england .
a handsome mince-pie had been made yesterday morning (which accounted for the mincemeat not being missed) , and the pudding was already on the boil .
as we neared home , joe vaguely acknowledging the occasion as an impressive and ceremonious one , went on ahead to open the front door .
” said he .
as i looked round at them , and at the pale gloom they made , and at the stopped clock , and at the withered articles of bridal dress upon the table and the ground , and at her own awful figure with its ghostly reflection thrown large by the fire upon the ceiling and the wall , i saw in everything the construction that my mind had come to , repeated and thrown back to me .
jo .
then i took up my little portmanteau and walked out .
but this boy , you know ;
in heaven’s name , don’t harp upon it !
“ mr pip , ” he returned , “ you will be welcome there , in a private and personal capacity .
remembering then , that the staircase-lights were blown out , i took up my reading-lamp and went out to the stair-head .
making my way along here with all despatch , i had just crossed a ditch which i knew to be very near the battery , and had just scrambled up the mound beyond the ditch , when i saw the man sitting before me .
they seemed to think the opportunity lost , if they failed to point the conversation at me , every now and then , and stick the point into me .
“ estella , ” said i , turning to her now , and trying to command my trembling voice , “ you know i love you .
if i could have kept him away by paying money , i certainly would have paid money .
pursuing the narrow intricacies of the streets which at that time tended westward near the middlesex shore of the river , my readiest access to the temple was close by the river-side , through whitefriars .
why should he suppose it necessary to be purified by suffering for his holiday clothes ?
the day happened to be sunday , and when i looked on the loveliness around me , and thought how it had grown and changed , and how the little wild-flowers had been forming , and the voices of the birds had been strengthening , by day and by night , under the sun and under the stars , while poor i lay burning and tossing on my bed , the mere remembrance of having burned and tossed there came like a check upon my peace .
mr wopsle , as the ill-requited uncle of the evening’s tragedy , fell to meditating aloud in his garden at camberwell .
“ that’s not so bad , ” said the sergeant , reflecting ;
“ well , but i mean a four-footed squeaker , ” said mr pumblechook .
but you are in debt , of course ?
all being made ready with much labour , and the hour come , the sultan was aroused in the dead of the night , and the sharpened axe that was to sever the rope from the great iron ring was put into his hand , and he struck with it , and the rope parted and rushed away , and the ceiling fell .
“ good-night !
all was quiet , and assuredly no other man was in those chambers .
you’re right , old chap !
hears ?
she was a cousin , an indigestive single woman , who called her rigidity religion , and her liver love .
“ don’t you know ?
“ you should know , ” said estella .
waiting for some reply , i looked about me , noticing how the sluice was abandoned and broken , and how the house of wood with a tiled roof would not be proof against the weather much longer , if it were so even now , and how the mud and ooze were coated with lime , and how the choking vapour of the kiln crept in a ghostly way towards me .
but the boldest point he made was this :
me , a married woman !
between him and me , secret articles were signed of which herbert was the subject , and i paid him half of my five hundred pounds down , and engaged for sundry other payments :
than i’m sorry to say , i’ve eat your pie .
“ then , mr pip , one of those two prisoners sat behind you tonight .
i saw that the bride within the bridal dress had withered like the dress , and like the flowers , and had no brightness left but the brightness of her sunken eyes .
that’s what he likes .
but he said nothing respecting it , and motioned me with a nod into my guardian’s room .
there was no indispensable necessity for my communicating with joe by letter , inasmuch as he sat beside me and we were alone .
” cried mr pumblechook , leaning back in his chair , quite flaccid with admiration , “ that’s the way you know ’em , sir !
but poetry costs money , cut it how you will , small or large , and it were not done .
as i am now generalising a period of my life with the object of clearing my way before me , i can scarcely do so better than by at once completing the description of our usual manners and customs at barnard’s inn .
“ and she is a she , i suppose ?
“ and him you found ?
her expression air then as follering :
a sort of a pastry-cook .
but he either beats or cringes .
“ indeed ?
but i like the fellow , pip ;
joe was evidently made uncomfortable by what he supposed to be my loss of appetite , and took a thoughtful bite out of his slice , which he didn’t seem to enjoy .
almost fearing , without knowing why , to come in view of the forge , i saw it at last , and saw that it was closed .
all this while , the strange man looked at nobody but me , and looked at me as if he were determined to have a shot at me at last , and bring me down .
oh !
and i doubt if even you’ll go so far as that .
“ out with it .
“ in their presence , ” pursued pumblechook , “ i will tell you , young man , what to say to joseph .
“ but not all of it ?
she drew her arm through mine , as if it must be done , and i requested a waiter who had been staring at the coach like a man who had never seen such a thing in his life , to show us a private sitting-room .
now , waxwork and skeleton seemed to have dark eyes that moved and looked at me .
the bridge was a plank , and it crossed a chasm about four feet wide and two deep .
as i watched them while they all stood clustering about the forge , enjoying themselves so much , i thought what terrible good sauce for a dinner my fugitive friend on the marshes was .
until i felt that i was going distracted , and rolled over on the pillow , and looked at the staring rounds upon the wall again .
after overhearing this dialogue , i should assuredly have got down and been left in the solitude and darkness of the highway , but for feeling certain that the man had no suspicion of my identity .
when my lips had parted , and had shaped some words that were without sound , i forced myself to tell him (though i could not do it distinctly) , that i had been chosen to succeed to some property .
but joe backed from it , and held on by the bird’s-nest .
it doubled itself up the wrong way over mrs pocket’s arm , exhibited a pair of knitted shoes and dimpled ankles to the company in lieu of its soft face , and was carried out in the highest state of mutiny .
” he asked , presently .
i have never forgotten your wrongs and their causes .
there’s a charming piece of music by handel , called the harmonious blacksmith .
“ i know her father too .
he threw me into the greatest confusion by laughing heartily and replying in a very sprightly manner , “ no , to be sure ;
love her !
“ my good handel , is it not obvious that with newgate in the next street , there must be far greater hazard in your breaking your mind to him and making him reckless , here , than elsewhere ?
nothing .
what would you have ?
this is written of , i am sensible , as if it had lasted a year .
i have heerd that my son is a wonderful hand at his business , sir ?
and whatever opinion you take away of me , shall make no difference in my remembrance of you .
“ it’ll do you small good , my man , being in the same plight yourself .
mr pocket got his hands in his hair again , and this time really did lift himself some inches out of his chair .
i think it’s tender , because the master of the shop was a juryman in some cases of ours the other day , and we let him down easy .
it was a dark night , though the full moon rose as i left the enclosed lands , and passed out upon the marshes .
“ no i am not , ” said joe .
“ naturally , ” said i .
on this hint we all rose to depart .
and yet i took it rather ill , too , that she should be so positive on the point .
i called to herbert and startop to keep before the tide , that she might see us lying by for her , and i adjured provis to sit quite still , wrapped in his cloak .
good lord !’ says he , camilla , what can it signify so long as the poor bereaved little things are in black ?’ so like matthew !
in a word , it was impossible for me to separate her , in the past or in the present , from the innermost life of my life .
you are very welcome , i am sure , mr pip ” ;
and by dint of having this stuff dropped over it all the night through , i was just able to bear its pain on the journey .
as if he could possibly be there !
“ it was some broken wittles that’s what it was and a dram of liquor , and a pie .
i so shaped out my walk as to arrive at the gate at my old time .
only professional .
merely stating to me , in an obliging manner and as a polite expostulatory notice to any one whom it might happen to concern , that he were not a-going to be bull-baited and badgered in his own place .
“ by g , it’s death !
the sensation was like being touched in the marrow with some pungent and searching acid , it set my very teeth on edge .
” it was but natural that i should take to him much more kindly than to drummle , and that , even in the earliest evenings of our boating , he and i should pull homeward abreast of one another , conversing from boat to boat , while bentley drummle came up in our wake alone , under the overhanging banks and among the rushes .
eyes that were very pretty and very good .
“ what do you suppose he wants now , handel ?
“ here is wine , ” said mr pumblechook .
this caused great confusion on board the steamer , and i heard them calling to us , and heard the order given to stop the paddles , and heard them stop , but felt her driving down upon us irresistibly .
chapter xii .
but after dinner , when i made him take his pipe , and when i had loitered with him about the forge , and when we sat down together on the great block of stone outside it , we got on better .
but through good and evil i stuck to my books .
the suitor , kissing the hem of the garment again before relinquishing it , replied , “ habraham latharuth , on thuthpithion of plate .
“ say that again !
” said estella , “ to know what satisfaction it gives me to see those people thwarted , or what an enjoyable sense of the ridiculous i have when they are made ridiculous .
chapter xxvii .
the winking lights upon the bridges were already pale , the coming sun was like a marsh of fire on the horizon .
“ did your client commit the robbery ?
“ no , thank you , ” i replied , turning from the table to brood over the fire .
but i didn’t say so .
must they !
” asked the landlord , vacillating weakly .
but joe had paid it , and the receipt was in his name .
i went towards them slowly , for my limbs were weak , but with a sense of increasing relief as i drew nearer to them , and a sense of leaving arrogance and untruthfulness further and further behind .
for there is still a balance remaining .
you wosn’t prepared for this as i wos .
whereas , the portable property certainly could have been saved .
“ did he ever tell you he liked you ?
once more ?
we are ready !
of course there was a public-house in the village , and of course joe liked sometimes to smoke his pipe there .
the marriage day was fixed , the wedding dresses were bought , the wedding tour was planned out , the wedding guests were invited .
he added as a self-evident proposition , engendering low spirits , “ but you can’t marry , you know , while you’re looking about you .
“ drat that boy , ” interposed my sister , frowning at me over her work , “ what a questioner he is .
“ you may get cheated , robbed , and murdered in london .
“ pocket-handkerchiefs out !
still watching me , he laid them one upon the other , folded them long-wise , gave them a twist , set fire to them at the lamp , and dropped the ashes into the tray .
“ estella who ?
“ come in , pip .
at last i come behind him and hit him on the cheek to turn him round and get a smashing one at him , when i was seen and seized .
perhaps they replied , or argued the point , or tried to encourage me to believe that i was better than i thought .
mr wopsle struck in upon that ;
the church not being “ thrown open , ” he was , as i have said , our clerk .
“ lord , mr pip !
you are part of my existence , part of myself .
their coarse mangy ungainly outer surface , as if they were lower animals ;
“ there , there !
his employer would not allow him to be drunk .
” mr pumblechook repeated .
” said flopson , appearing to think it most surprising .
“ i remember i entertained a great objection to your adversary , because i took it ill that he should be brought here to pester me with his company .
it was quite a wilderness , and there were old melon-frames and cucumber-frames in it , which seemed in their decline to have produced a spontaneous growth of weak attempts at pieces of old hats and boots , with now and then a weedy offshoot into the likeness of a battered saucepan .
nor , how i passed and repassed the gate many times before i could make up my mind to ring .
he had nothing else to do , poor fellow , except at a certain hour of every afternoon to “ go to lloyd’s ” in observance of a ceremony of seeing his principal , i think .
towards mr pocket , as a grown-up infant with no notion of his own interests , they showed the complacent forbearance i had heard them express .
i was in mortal terror of my interlocutor with the iron leg ;
“ there was another in with compeyson , as was called arthur , not as being so chrisen’d , but as a surname .
insomuch that mr pumblechook cried audibly , “ good again !
however , the only thing to be done being to knock at the door , i knocked , and was told from within to enter .
“ and yet i could swear to him .
a master-mind .
the mournfulness of the place and time , and the great terror of this illusion , though it was but momentary , caused me to feel an indescribable awe as i came out between the open wooden gates where i had once wrung my hair after estella had wrung my heart .
pip , sir .
and i wondered who shod all the horses there , and wished joe did .
perhaps , they became the restless people they were , in consequence .
” a man may have had a misfortun’ and been in the church , ” said joe , lowering his voice to an argumentative and feeling tone , “ but that is no reason why you should put him out at such a time .
“ is that the exact substance ?
“ awful !
that he was expatriated for the term of his natural life ;
she made signs to me that she wanted him to sit down close to her , and wanted me to put her arms round his neck .
how do you do ?
and i fancied i could see how he leaned back in it , and bit his forefinger at the clients .
i can be well recommended by all the neighbours , and i hope i can be industrious and patient , and teach myself while i teach others .
but joe had got the idea of a present in his head and must harp upon it .
“ you , is it , mr pip ?
” joe looked at me , making the motion with his lips and eyebrows , “ she ?
” muttered joe , shaking his head at me in very serious remonstrance .
“ you see , dear boy , when i was over yonder , t’other side the world , i was always a looking to this side ;
at the door .
which was the less excusable , he added , when there were so many subjects “ going about .
“ is it , ” pursued the stranger in his most sarcastic and suspicious manner , “ the printed paper you have just been reading from ?
the imaginary student pursued by the misshapen creature he had impiously made , was not more wretched than i , pursued by the creature who had made me , and recoiling from him with a stronger repulsion , the more he admired me and the fonder he was of me .
that he was not at all likely to obtain a pardon ;
“ a man can’t help his feelings , mr wemmick , ” pleaded mike .
“ it’s more than that , then , ” said joe .
the other fugitive , who was evidently in extreme horror of his companion , repeated , “ he tried to murder me .
“ true , sir .
we owed so much to herbert’s ever cheerful industry and readiness , that i often wondered how i had conceived that old idea of his inaptitude , until i was one day enlightened by the reflection , that perhaps the inaptitude had never been in him at all , but had been in me .
i knew my way to the battery , pretty straight , for i had been down there on a sunday with joe , and joe , sitting on an old gun , had told me that when i was ’prentice to him , regularly bound , we would have such larks there !
and disappeared and closed the door .
he further gave me leave to accompany the prisoner to london ;
the truth was , that she had objected to me as an expensive companion who did herbert no good , and that , when herbert had first proposed to present me to her , she had received the proposal with such very moderate warmth , that herbert had felt himself obliged to confide the state of the case to me , with a view to the lapse of a little time before i made her acquaintance .
“ i do not even know , ” said i , speaking low as he took his seat at the table , “ by what name to call you .
and i did .
for i was inwardly crying for her then , and i know what i know of the pain she cost me afterwards .
in my fancy , i saw the boat with its convict crew waiting for them at the slime-washed stairs , again heard the gruff “ give way , you !
i shook my head gloomily .
and i always saw in her face , a face rising out of the caldron .
“ i know , joe , i know .
she drew a pitcher of beer from the cask for the soldiers , and invited the sergeant to take a glass of brandy .
a figure all in yellow white , with but one shoe to the feet ;
” mrs pocket received her property , at first with a look of unutterable surprise as if she had never seen it before , and then with a laugh of recognition , and said , “ thank you , flopson , ” and forgot me , and went on reading .
so unchanging was the dull old house , the yellow light in the darkened room , the faded spectre in the chair by the dressing-table glass , that i felt as if the stopping of the clocks had stopped time in that mysterious place , and , while i and everything else outside it grew older , it stood still .
nothing less than two fat sweltering one-pound notes that seemed to have been on terms of the warmest intimacy with all the cattle-markets in the county .
“ why then , ” said the turnkey , grinning again , “ he knows what mr jaggers is .
“ i done what i could to keep you and tickler in sunders , but my power were not always fully equal to my inclinations .
and of course he’s going .
then , i got up and partly dressed , and sat at the window to take a last look out , and in taking it fell asleep .
” throwing his finger at him again .
“ but , estella , do hear me speak .
i therefore got up and put on my clothes , and went out across the yard into the long stone passage , designing to gain the outer courtyard and walk there for the relief of my mind .
in these discussions , joe bore no part .
that the mother and father , unknown to one another , were dwelling within so many miles , furlongs , yards if you like , of one another .
i explained that i was waiting to meet somebody who was coming up by coach , and i inquired after the castle and the aged .
“ of her having the pleasure , ” i added .
there has never been the least departure from the strict line of fact .
it’s the cause of much suffering , but it’s a consolation to know i posses it , when i wake up in the night .
“ now , mr pip , ” pursued the lawyer , “ i address the rest of what i have to say , to you .
mr pumblechook and mrs joe stared at one another as they well might and both repeated , “ in a black velvet coach ?
that i could have been at our old church in my old church-going clothes , on the very last sunday that ever was , seemed a combination of impossibilities , geographical and social , solar and lunar .
i earnestly expressed my hope that he wouldn’t , and held tighter to the tombstone on which he had put me ;
there i was , on joe’s back , and there was joe beneath me , charging at the ditches like a hunter , and stimulating mr wopsle not to tumble on his roman nose , and to keep up with us .
look’ee here , pip .
this was very uncomfortable , and i was half afraid .
congratulations , mr pip .
i’ll put ’em on the outside of the row .
herbert lay asleep in his bed , and our old fellow-student lay asleep on the sofa .
yes , or no ?
mr camilla interposing , as mrs camilla laid her hand upon her heaving bosom , that lady assumed an unnatural fortitude of manner which i supposed to be expressive of an intention to drop and choke when out of view , and kissing her hand to miss havisham , was escorted forth .
him and some more was a sitting among the tables when i went in , and the landlord (which had a knowledge of me , and was a sporting one) called him out , and said , i think this is a man that might suit you ,’ meaning i was .
that it was a conspiracy between them ;
ah !
” said mr jaggers .
and there was the solitary flat marsh ;
that i was a brick in the house-wall , and yet entreating to be released from the giddy place where the builders had set me ;
” said i , in a general way , and with quiet desperation .
i inferred from the methodical nature of miss skiffins’s arrangements that she made tea there every sunday night ;
we were of nearly the same age , though of course the age told for more in her case than in mine ;
i derived from this , that joe’s education , like steam , was yet in its infancy .
a pause succeeded , during which the honest and irrepressible baby made a series of leaps and crows at little jane , who appeared to me to be the only member of the family (irrespective of servants) with whom it had any decided acquaintance .
“ here is the man , ” said joe .
you’ll do yourself a mischief .
“ jaggers , ” interposed miss havisham , much to my relief , “ leave my pip alone , and go with him to your dinner .
as i stood compassionating her , and thinking how , in the progress of time , i too had come to be a part of the wrecked fortunes of that house , her eyes rested on me .
“ which i meantersay , sir , as i would in preference have carried her to the church myself , along with three or four friendly ones wot come to it with willing harts and arms , but it were considered wot the neighbours would look down on such and would be of opinions as it were wanting in respect .
yes .
i did intend to ask you to use any little opportunities you might have after i was gone , of improving dear joe .
” moaned miss havisham , with her former action .
herbert was rarely there less frequently than three times in a week , and he never brought me a single word of intelligence that was at all alarming .
“ much about the same , i should say .
“ i don’t mind admitting also that i am not engaged .
it won’t lower your opinion of mr jaggers’s powers .
but estella is a different case , and if you can ever undo any scrap of what you have done amiss in keeping a part of her right nature away from her , it will be better to do that than to bemoan the past through a hundred years .
” cried camilla , whose fermenting feelings appeared to rise from her legs to her bosom .
“ lucky for you then , handel , ” said herbert , “ that you are picked out for her and allotted to her .
serve a friend with it , and you may know the end of it too , but it’s a less pleasant and profitable end .
“ keep still , you little devil , or i’ll cut your throat !
“ well aged parent , ” said wemmick , shaking hands with him in a cordial and jocose way , “ how am you ?
didn’t us , pip ?
i said to biddy we would walk a little farther , and we did so , and the summer afternoon toned down into the summer evening , and it was very beautiful .
” said i .
“ this is altogether a walworth sentiment , please .
when we got back , he had the hardihood to tell me that he wished my sister could have known i had done her so much honour , and to hint that she would have considered it reasonably purchased at the price of her death .
if it was all your money twenty times told , to the last brass farden !
startop , being a lively , bright young fellow , and drummle being the exact opposite , the latter was always disposed to resent him as a direct personal affront .
“ am i , grandpapa’s granddaughter , to be nothing in the house ?
not that trabb’s boy was of a malignant nature , but that he had too much spare vivacity , and that it was in his constitution to want variety and excitement at anybody’s expense .
” and then gathered up his coat-tails , as he had gathered up the subject , and stood frowning at his boots as if he suspected them of designs against him .
none of these things will interfere with my chartering a few thousand tons on my own account .
“ now , don’t echo , ” i retorted .
“ don’t lose your temper , ” said joe .
wemmick looked very serious .
“ who’s a-going to try ?
chapter xxvi .
” cried miss havisham , turning wildly to me .
as i have told you before , i am the mere agent .
will that do ?
” these were agreeably dispersed among small specimens of china and glass , various neat trifles made by the proprietor of the museum , and some tobacco-stoppers carved by the aged .
i got a dreadful start , when i thought i heard the file still going ;
“ why don’t you ask him ?
to me , the remembrance of our last parting has been ever mournful and painful .
for , i have a lively remembrance that i supposed my declaration that i was to “ walk in the same all the days of my life , ” laid me under an obligation always to go through the village from our house in one particular direction , and never to vary it by turning down by the wheelwright’s or up by the mill .
i followed her at a distance , and saw her go up the staircase .
“ seven ?
“ it’s a terrible thing , joe ;
hereupon , mr pocket went out of the room , and we made the best of ourselves until he came back .
“ when shall i have you here again ?
where he sat down , nursing his left leg in both arms .
joe said he was agreeable , and would take me , if mrs joe approved .
” echoed my sister .
his great strength seemed to sit stronger upon him than ever before , as he did this with his hands hanging loose and heavy at his sides , and with his eyes scowling at me .
“ is he right , that man ?
then he placed his breakfast before him with great care , and said , “ all right , ain’t you , aged p .
” said wemmick , getting upon a chair , and blowing the dust off the horrible heads before bringing them down .
but i made up the fire , which was still burning , and got some coffee ready for them .
” each of these exclamations was a shriek ;
nod away at him , mr pip ;
“ ah !
you were quite a pigeon-fancier .
“ when i came in , miss havisham , i thought there was nothing of estella in the face or figure ;
” said he , repeating my words to biddy in the last interview i had with her .
you must come alone .
my hair had been caught by the fire , but not my head or face .
“ waldengarver ?
joe gave a reproachful cough , as much as to say , “ well , i told you so .
i am pretty well known .
i worked hard , that you should be above work .
yet i do not call to mind that i was ever in my earlier youth the subject of remark in our social family circle , but some large-handed person took some such ophthalmic steps to patronise me .
“ i saw that you saw me .
how much of my ungracious condition of mind may have been my own fault , how much miss havisham’s , how much my sister’s , is now of no moment to me or to any one .
” in the pantry , which was far more abundantly supplied than usual , owing to the season , i was very much alarmed by a hare hanging up by the heels , whom i rather thought i caught , when my back was half turned , winking .
indeed , it demanded from him a constant attention , and a quickness of eye and hand , very like that exacted by wicket-keeping .
that young man hears the words i speak .
you can break his heart .
i reminded him of it when i bought the fowl , and i said , “ pick us out a good one , old briton , because if we had chosen to keep you in the box another day or two , we could easily have done it .
“ no , miss havisham .
infinite pains were then taken by biddy to convey to my sister some idea of what had happened .
i had become aware of an alarming growling overhead , and had probably expressed the fact in my countenance .
morning made a considerable difference in my general prospect of life , and brightened it so much that it scarcely seemed the same .
chapter xxxv .
“ i know’d my name to be magwitch , chrisen’d abel .
she is a lady and very beautiful .
“ i think she is very proud , ” i replied , in a whisper .
in the act of dipping forward as if i were going to bathe among the horses , i woke in a fright and took the question up again .
“ we giv’ him the name of pip for your sake , dear old chap , ” said joe , delighted , when i took another stool by the child’s side (but i did not rumple his hair) , “ and we hoped he might grow a little bit like you , and we think he do .
when he had spoken some sound words of sympathy and encouragement , we sat down to consider the question , what was to be done ?
and he stirred it and he tasted it ;
in every rage of wind and rush of rain , i heard pursuers .
“ these ?
this gave me power to keep them back and to look at her :
time enough , time enough .
i was afraid to sleep , even if i had been inclined , for i knew that at the first faint dawn of morning i must rob the pantry .
i too sat down before the fire and gazed at the coals , and nothing was said for a long time .
i had my box brought alongside me in a barrow .
still , the coincidence of our being together on the coach , was sufficiently strange to fill me with a dread that some other coincidence might at any moment connect me , in his hearing , with my name .
her look was very intent .
it was on the third or fourth occasion of my going out walking in the temple gardens leaning on joe’s arm , that i saw this change in him very plainly .
but didn’t you never think it might be me ?
we went out as lookers on ;
i knew him before he gave me one of those aids , though , a moment before , i had not been conscious of remotely suspecting his identity .
if you can ever write under my name , “ i forgive her , ” though ever so long after my broken heart is dust pray do it !
he was younger than me , but he’d got craft , and he’d got learning , and he overmatched me five hundred times told and no mercy .
that i had heard that other convict reiterate that he had tried to murder him ;
she’s a tartar .
the best light of the day was gone when i passed along the quiet echoing courts behind the high street .
that’s what it was ;
for , her hair always wanted brushing , her hands always wanted washing , and her shoes always wanted mending and pulling up at heel .
we were very gay and sociable , and i asked him , in the course of conversation , what he was ?
“ what is it ?
people are put in the hulks because they murder , and because they rob , and forge , and do all sorts of bad ;
“ everybody must who sees her , miss havisham .
and we left him on the landing outside his door , holding a light over the stair-rail to light us downstairs .
” i timidly explained .
on this particular evening the urgency of my case demanded a pint of this mixture , which was poured down my throat , for my greater comfort , while mrs joe held my head under her arm , as a boot would be held in a bootjack .
“ don’t you expect to see him ?
“ at epsom races , a matter of over twenty years ago , i got acquainted wi’ a man whose skull i’d crack wi’ this poker , like the claw of a lobster , if i’d got it on this hob .
“ do you wish to come in ?
and your sister , she’s no worse than she were .
but i was too much bewildered between breathless curiosity and surprise , to be sure of it .
i , because she looked so fresh and pleasant ;
i was very much afraid of him again , now that he had worked himself into this fierce hurry , and i was likewise very much afraid of keeping away from home any longer .
at last i done it .
and he fell to baring and spanning his arm to show how muscular it was , and we all fell to baring and spanning our arms in a ridiculous manner .
i was not averse to doing this , as it served to make me and my boat a commoner incident among the water-side people there .
one keeps a secret better than two .
mr pumblechook helped me to the liver wing , and to the best slice of tongue (none of those out-of-the-way no thoroughfares of pork now) , and took , comparatively speaking , no care of himself at all .
she was a woman of about forty , i supposed , but i may have thought her younger than she was .
when we came to pumblechook’s , my sister bounced in and left us .
chapter xxxvii .
“ no , don’t be hurt , ” she pleaded quite pathetically ;
do you see nothing that he might do , under the disappointment ?
i have not the least objection to receiving it from him .
“ how does she use you , pip ;
this was the only retort except glass or crockery that the heavy creature was capable of making ;
then they were all formally doomed , and some of them were supported out , and some of them sauntered out with a haggard look of bravery , and a few nodded to the gallery , and two or three shook hands , and others went out chewing the fragments of herb they had taken from the sweet herbs lying about .
and she’s out now , making it a baker’s dozen .
chapter xxii .
not at all .
“ what are you about ?
will that do ?
gargery had departed this life on monday last at twenty minutes past six in the evening , and that my attendance was requested at the interment on monday next at three o’clock in the afternoon .
thus trabb’s boy became their guide , and with him they went out to the sluice-house , though by the town way to the marshes , which i had avoided .
we entered this haven through a wicket-gate , and were disgorged by an introductory passage into a melancholy little square that looked to me like a flat burying-ground .
a good fellow , a skilled hand , fond of us , and enthusiastic and honourable .
i cannot exaggerate the enhanced disquiet into which this conversation threw me , or the special and peculiar terror i felt at compeyson’s having been behind me “ like a ghost .
never putting in another word , but always leaving a blank and going on to the next word .
“ let only me be hurt , if i have been ungenerous .
miss havisham motioning to me for the third or fourth time to sit down , i took the chair by the dressing-table , which i had often seen her occupy .
here’s the undertaker a coming , to see how you’re a getting on with your work !
i had alighted from joe’s back on the brink of the ditch when we came up , and had not moved since .
but my dear handel , ” herbert went on , as if we had been talking , instead of silent , “ its having been so strongly rooted in the breast of a boy whom nature and circumstances made so romantic , renders it very serious .
“ love her , love her , love her !
a man with the gout in his right hand and everywhere else can’t expect to get through a double gloucester without hurting himself .
wemmick , having finished his breakfast , here looked at his watch , and began to get his coat on .
speak out .
i tell you , i heard her .
“ i can’t pretend that i do like them , and i suppose you don’t particularly .
“ are you amused , mr drummle ?
that evil genius , compeyson , the worst of scoundrels among many scoundrels , knowing of his keeping out of the way at that time and of his reasons for doing so , of course afterwards held the knowledge over his head as a means of keeping him poorer and working him harder .
the condition is laid down .
finally , he went away with mr and mrs hubble , to make an evening of it , i felt sure , and to tell the jolly bargemen that he was the founder of my fortunes and my earliest benefactor .
“ look’ee here , pip , ” said he , laying his hand on my arm in a suddenly altered and subdued manner ;
“ you would have been disposed of for so many shillings according to the market price of the article , and dunstable the butcher would have come up to you as you lay in your straw , and he would have whipped you under his left arm , and with his right he would have tucked up his frock to get a penknife from out of his waistcoat-pocket , and he would have shed your blood and had your life .
“ don’t you know ?
now , when i saw joe open his blue eyes and roll them all round the kitchen in helpless amazement , i was overtaken by penitence ;
but not warmly .
i suppose there was a time once when my father had not given matters up ;
“ you have heard of the name .
it’s remarkable what mere force of grip there is in these hands .
thankye , thankye !
“ i come here , ” he retorted , “ on my legs .
to the present hour , the weary western streets of london on a cold , dusty spring night , with their ranges of stern , shut-up mansions , and their long rows of lamps , are melancholy to me from this association .
supposing ever you kep any little matter to yourself , when you was a little child , you kep it mostly because you know’d as j .
“ sophia has told you , ” said mrs pocket .
without being sanguine as to my own part in those bright plans , i felt that herbert’s way was clearing fast , and that old bill barley had but to stick to his pepper and rum , and his daughter would soon be happily provided for .
but i said nothing , and indeed had enough to do in keeping a bashful watch upon my company manners .
in the infinite meaning of his reply and his boundless confidence in his views , the jack took one of his bloated shoes off , looked into it , knocked a few stones out of it on the kitchen floor , and put it on again .
i glanced down at the foot from which the shoe was absent , and saw that the silk stocking on it , once white , now yellow , had been trodden ragged .
” said my sister .
i am all right , ” said gruff old orlick .
” and i grieve to add that peals of laughter greeted mr wopsle on every one of these occasions .
lastly , as he had not yet been seen by the laundress or her niece , he was to keep himself out of their view until his change of dress was made .
reward of ingratitoode to his earliest benefactor , and founder of fortun’s .
she was immediately deposed , however , by herbert , who silently led me into the parlour and shut the door .
by and by , i noticed wemmick’s arm beginning to disappear again , and gradually fading out of view .
with my heart beating like a heavy hammer of disordered action , i rose out of my chair , and stood with my hand upon the back of it , looking wildly at him .
“ i know your engagements , ” said he , “ and i know you are out of sorts , mr pip .
keep in sunders !
“ spooney !
no doubt i should have been miserable whomsoever she had favoured ;
i saw reawakening appetite in the roman nostrils of mr wopsle .
my guardian threw his supplicant off with supreme indifference , and left him dancing on the pavement as if it were red hot .
if a dread of not being understood be hidden in the breasts of other young people to anything like the extent to which it used to be hidden in mine , which i consider probable , as i have no particular reason to suspect myself of having been a monstrosity , it is the key to many reservations .
so we had to wait , after ringing the bell , until some one should come to open it .
that done , extricate yourself , in heaven’s name , and we’ll see it out together , dear old boy .
mr .
and now go !
“ and so i swear it is death , ” said he , putting his pipe back in his mouth , “ and death by the rope , in the open street not fur from this , and it’s serious that you should fully understand it to be so .
at the same time this nurse picked up mrs pocket’s handkerchief , and said , “ if that don’t make six times you’ve dropped it , mum !
meanwhile , councils went on in the kitchen at home , fraught with almost insupportable aggravation to my exasperated spirit .
my worldly affairs began to wear a gloomy appearance , and i was pressed for money by more than one creditor .
and there , fenced into the corner with joe’s leg , and sitting on my own little stool looking at the fire , was i again !
“ tell us your name !
“ that is , he says she did .
was his face at all disfigured ?
” the cattle came upon me with like suddenness , staring out of their eyes , and steaming out of their nostrils , “ halloa , young thief !
“ exactly , ” said i ;
and there were two or three trees in it , and there was the stump of a ruined windmill , and there was the old green copper rope-walk , whose long and narrow vista i could trace in the moonlight , along a series of wooden frames set in the ground , that looked like superannuated haymaking-rakes which had grown old and lost most of their teeth .
tell us what you mean by pretty well , boy ?
that person is the person from whom you derive your expectations , and the secret is solely held by that person and by me .
while estella was away lighting them down , miss havisham still walked with her hand on my shoulder , but more and more slowly .
joe patted the coverlet on my shoulder with his great good hand , and said , in what i thought a husky voice , “ good night !
now , waking up uneasily , with prolix conversations about nothing , in my ears ;
there , i was roused by mr pumblechook’s hailing me .
admired by all who see her .
“ i have thought it over again and again , ” said herbert , “ and i think i know a better course than taking a thames waterman .
in the interval , miss havisham , in a fantastic way , had put some of the most beautiful jewels from her dressing-table into estella’s hair , and about her bosom and arms ;
she made use of me to tease other admirers , and she turned the very familiarity between herself and me to the account of putting a constant slight on my devotion to her .
“ i’ll tell you , ” said she , in the same hurried passionate whisper , “ what real love is .
the candles that lighted that room of hers were placed in sconces on the wall .
i was very hot indeed upon old orlick’s daring to admire her ;
“ my friend and companion , ” said i , rising from the sofa , “ is absent ;
i felt that this delicacy arose out of the consideration that the plan would save herbert some expense , so i went off to little britain and imparted my wish to mr jaggers .
” said i .
my business habits had one other bright feature , which i called “ leaving a margin .
you brought your adoration and your portmanteau here together .
didn’t you tell me that your guardian , mr jaggers , told you in the beginning , that you were not endowed with expectations only ?
chapter lvii .
keep me down !’ then he lifted himself up hard , and was dead .
“ there , sir !
why i hoarded up this last wretched little rag of the robe of hope that was rent and given to the winds , how do i know ?
as one of the soldiers , who carried a basket in lieu of a gun , went down on his knee to open it , my convict looked round him for the first time , and saw me .
the only time you worked out , in this part of the country ?
the pale young gentleman’s nose had stained my trousers , and i tried to wash out that evidence of my guilt in the dead of night .
“ i should think i could , miss , ” said i , in a shy way .
the cathedral chimes had at once a sadder and a more remote sound to me , as i hurried on avoiding observation , than they had ever had before ;
“ or provis , ” i suggested .
“ the answer is , ” returned joe , sternly , “ no .
she took the first opportunity of angrily ordering my father out of the house , in his presence , and my father has never seen her since .
there have been occasions in my later life (i suppose as in most lives) when i have felt for a time as if a thick curtain had fallen on all its interest and romance , to shut me out from anything save dull endurance any more .
she was insensible , and i was afraid to have her moved , or even touched .
but it will be comfortable presently , it seems that the woman was a young woman , and a jealous woman , and a revengeful woman ;
you and i and joe would have wanted nothing then , and joe and i would perhaps have gone partners when i was out of my time , and i might even have grown up to keep company with you , and we might have sat on this very bank on a fine sunday , quite different people .
to the satisfaction of the lady and the gentleman , it never will be .
when i was old enough , i was to be apprenticed to joe , and until i could assume that dignity i was not to be what mrs joe called “ pompeyed , ” or (as i render it) pampered .
“ on the contrary , ” said he , “ i thank you , for though we are strictly in our private and personal capacity , still it may be mentioned that there are newgate cobwebs about , and it brushes them away .
to whom my sister , more for the relief of her own mind than for the gratification of his , related my pretended experiences .
beyond their dark line there was a ribbon of clear sky , hardly broad enough to hold the red large moon .
” said i .
biddy said never a single word .
i looked for him had crammed their mummery into bags , and were gone too , the house felt wholesomer .
” said herbert .
she tells me that she wants to see you on a little matter of business you mentioned to her .
the moment he ceased , she looked at him again .
“ well put !
“ no , joe , there was nothing at all of the kind .
the sudden exclusion of the night , and the substitution of black darkness in its place , warned me that the man had closed a shutter .
of the conduct of the worldly minded pumblechook while this was doing , i desire to say no more than it was all addressed to me ;
“ tramping , begging , thieving , working sometimes when i could , though that warn’t as often as you may think , till you put the question whether you would ha’ been over-ready to give me work yourselves , a bit of a poacher , a bit of a labourer , a bit of a wagoner , a bit of a haymaker , a bit of a hawker , a bit of most things that don’t pay and lead to trouble , i got to be a man .
there was an expression of contempt on his face , and he bit the side of a great forefinger as he watched the group of faces .
“ well !
in the same moment i saw her running at me , shrieking , with a whirl of fire blazing all about her , and soaring at least as many feet above her head as she was high .
“ there , there !
when i went to lunnon town sirs , too rul loo rul too rul loo rul wasn’t i done very brown sirs ?
even when i was taken to have a new suit of clothes , the tailor had orders to make them like a kind of reformatory , and on no account to let me have the free use of my limbs .
and what thick boots !
now , this , ” said mr trabb , taking down a roll of cloth , and tiding it out in a flowing manner over the counter , preparatory to getting his hand under it to show the gloss , “ is a very sweet article .
“ yes , sir , ” said i .
when we came to the river-side and sat down on the bank , with the water rippling at our feet , making it all more quiet than it would have been without that sound , i resolved that it was a good time and place for the admission of biddy into my inner confidence .
i was a blacksmith’s boy but yesterday ;
“ herbert , i shall always need you , because i shall always love you ;
i am very sorry to see it , and it’s a it’s a bad side of human nature .
“ and now , ” said joe , “ you ain’t that strong yet , old chap , that you can take in more nor one additional shovelful to-day .
used !
i asked her if my guardian had any charge of her while she remained here ?
as he was so communicative , i felt that reserve on my part would be a bad return unsuited to our years .
“ begging your pardon , ma’am , ” returned the housemaid , “ i should wish to speak at once , and to speak to master .
as i put the window open and stood looking out , i saw joe come slowly forth at the dark door , below , and take a turn or two in the air ;
but he dances at me , whenever he can catch my eye .
i turned my eyes a little dimmed by looking up at the frosty light towards a great wooden beam in a low nook of the building near me on my right hand , and i saw a figure hanging there by the neck .
“ we don’t know what you have done , but we wouldn’t have you starved to death for it , poor miserable fellow-creatur .
now , mr jaggers showed that she had struggled through a great lot of brambles which were not as high as her face ;
“ i should be , if i believed what you said just now , ” i replied , to turn it off .
it must be done , as i may say , on the sly .
i did not .
this is devilish good of you .
her walnut-shell countenance likewise turned from brown to green and yellow .
it seemed to me that he took all blows and buffets now with just the same air as he had taken mine then .
it was in this place , and at this moment , that a strange thing happened to my fancy .
“ ay !
“ i am afraid you won’t leave any of it for him , ” said i , timidly ;
“ o , his manners !
it was quite in vain for me to endeavour to make him sensible that he ought to speak to miss havisham .
having written to joe , to offer him consolation , and to assure him that i would come to the funeral , i passed the intermediate days in the curious state of mind i have glanced at .
once for all ;
“ why you see , old chap , ” said joe , in a tone of remonstrance , and by way of getting at it by degrees , “ i wouldn’t go so far as to say that , for that’s a deal to say ;
i crossed the staircase landing , and entered the room she indicated .
she wanders about in the night , and then lays hands on such food as she takes .
their pieces were cocked and levelled when we all ran in .
but i think there was a person , too , come in alonger me .
i remember mr hubble as a tough , high-shouldered , stooping old man , of a sawdusty fragrance , with his legs extraordinarily wide apart :
“ but i must tell you i should have no opinion of you , biddy , if he danced at you with your own consent .
she was in her chair near the old table , in the old dress , with her two hands crossed on her stick , her chin resting on them , and her eyes on the fire .
she managed our whole domestic life , and wonderfully too ;
throughout dinner he took a dry delight in making sarah pocket greener and yellower , by often referring in conversation with me to my expectations ;
what hurt have you got ?
i was usually at hammersmith about half the week , and when i was at hammersmith i haunted richmond , whereof separately by and by .
ten thousand times ?
this is him untoe the sister of which i was uncle by marriage , as her name was georgiana m’ria from her own mother , let him deny it if he can !
“ well !
i never knew joe to remember anything from one sunday to another , or to acquire , under my tuition , any piece of information whatever .
and we arranged that he should cut his hair close , and wear a little powder .
i selected the materials for a suit , with the assistance of mr trabb’s judgment , and re-entered the parlour to be measured .
“ i left a note for you at each of the temple gates , on the chance .
“ i will , sir , ” i returned .
“ shall i see something very uncommon ?
the administration of mutton instead of medicine , the substitution of tea for joe , and the baker for bacon , were among the mildest of my own mistakes .
i noticed that miss havisham put down the jewel exactly on the spot from which she had taken it up .
she is thousands of miles away , from me , ” said i .
and it became the first duty of my life to say to him , and read to him , what i knew he ought to hear .
the assailant had come in so silently and suddenly , that she had been felled before she could look round .
either i am very stupid , or you are very clever .
it further appeared that the book i had seen mrs pocket reading in the garden was all about titles , and that she knew the exact date at which her grandpapa would have come into the book , if he ever had come at all .
among this good company i should have felt myself , even if i hadn’t robbed the pantry , in a false position .
if he should turn to and beat her , he may possibly get the strength on his side ;
thirdly .
i believed not too , for , although in my brooding state i had taken no especial notice of the people behind me , i thought it likely that a face at all disfigured would have attracted my attention .
“ that’s a curious name , miss .
“ the retirement reminds you of the country .
you never had a chance before you came here , and see how improved you are !
to this she returned :
occasionally , the smoke came rolling down the chimney as though it could not bear to go out into such a night ;
there it is !
i often paid him a visit in the dark back-room in which he consorted with an ink-jar , a hat-peg , a coal-box , a string-box , an almanac , a desk and stool , and a ruler ;
the spider , as mr jaggers had called him , was used to lying in wait , however , and had the patience of his tribe .
“ well ?
“ he says it all .
the boar could not put me into my usual bedroom , which was engaged (probably by some one who had expectations) , and could only assign me a very indifferent chamber among the pigeons and post-chaises up the yard .
i didn’t see ;
“ you may be certain that i laugh because they fail .
“ not that we wanted to take them , you understand ;
“ mr jaggers , ” said miss havisham , taking me up in a firm tone , “ had nothing to do with it , and knew nothing of it .
therefore i invited him , and he went to barnard’s with us , wrapped up to the eyes , and we did our best for him , and he sat until two o’clock in the morning , reviewing his success and developing his plans .
when we had completed these preparations , they drove up , wrapped to the eyes .
at first , a misgiving crossed me that wemmick would be instantly dismissed from his employment ;
” which , to say the least of it , was out of keeping .
a window was raised , and a clear voice demanded “ what name ?
it was not at all expressed to me that he even comprehended my intention , for he gave me a look that i did not understand , and it all passed in a moment .
imagine one selected day struck out of it , and think how different its course would have been .
” and the man’s eyes looked at me , and then looked over my head , and then looked all round me , and then he drew his hand across his lips and laughed .
by the surgeon’s directions , her bed was carried into that room and laid upon the great table , which happened to be well suited to the dressing of her injuries .
pitying his desolation , and watching him as he gradually settled down upon the pie , i made bold to say , “ i am glad you enjoy it .
provis in his rooms , the signal whose use was over , pretty clara , the good motherly woman , old bill barley on his back , all drifting by , as on the swift stream of my life fast running out to sea !
what of that ?
being extremely amiable and cheerful .
we went in at the door , which stood open , and into a gloomy room with a low ceiling , on the ground-floor at the back .
now i won’t have it .
“ you are to wait here , you boy , ” said estella ;
“ has she been in his service ever since ?
” with which he took them out , and gave them , not to miss havisham , but to me .
i have an affection for the road yet (though it is not so pleasant a road as it was then) , formed in the impressibility of untried youth and hope .
“ what is there in that fellow in the corner yonder , to use your words , that i need look at ?
“ was the woman brought in guilty ?
“ i shall not be that .
yet i did not , and for the reason that i mistrusted that if i did , he would think me worse than i was .
well ?
i called to the woman who had opened the gate when i entered , that i would not trouble her just yet , but would walk round the place before leaving .
i was soon at the battery after that , and there was the right man , hugging himself and limping to and fro , as if he had never all night left off hugging and limping , waiting for me .
but then , as herbert changed the bandages , more by the light of the fire than by the outer light , he went back to it spontaneously .
“ now , what do you make of four times five ?
yielding to it in the same mechanical kind of way , i left a note in pencil for herbert , telling him that as i should be so soon going away , i knew not for how long , i had decided to hurry down and back , to ascertain for myself how miss havisham was faring .
and i am fond of a bit of garden and a summer-house .
” said she , assenting with her head , but not looking at me .
“ yes .
“ is the lady anybody ?
and i really do believe (to this hour with less penitence than i ought to feel) , that if these hands could have taken a linchpin out of his chaise-cart , they would have done it .
identity of mr pip and friend confessed .
we should get on so well , handel !
i knew that it was coming on me now , and i knew very little else , and was even careless as to that .
the lighted candle stood in the dark passage within , as of old , and i took it up and ascended the staircase alone .
i thanked him and ran home again , and there i found that joe had already locked the front door and vacated the state parlour , and was seated by the kitchen fire with a hand on each knee , gazing intently at the burning coals .
i saw miss havisham put her hand to her heart and hold it there , as she sat looking by turns at estella and at me .
“ that’s a pity !
this was my homely thought , as i contemplated the box-tree .
jane , you undutiful little thing , go and lie down .
very like .
“ no , my dear friend , ” said he , when he had recovered wind for speech .
“ he says , and gives it out publicly , “ i want to see the man who’ll rob me .
“ yes i do ;
“ it shall be done , sir .
“ let me think .
“ compeyson took it easy as a good riddance for both sides .
so the pocket-book which had once been in my hands passed into the officer’s .
“ i don’t like to say , ” i stammered .
this being considered a good precaution , soon after breakfast he and i set forth , without saying anything at the tavern .
on the whole , i resolved to leave the avenger behind .
but i knew them well , and could have found my way on a far darker night , and had no excuse for returning , being there .
lord strike me dead !’ i says each time , and i goes out in the air to say it under the open heavens , but wot , if i gets liberty and money , i’ll make that boy a gentleman !’ and i done it .
this is a terrible hardened one ,’ they says to prison wisitors , picking out me .
“ we’d be puzzled how to bring down a jail-bird on the wing , to-night .
she was acquitted .
camilla brightened when miss pocket met with this rebuff ;
his uneasiness increasing instead of subsiding , after a quarter of an hour’s consideration , he set off for the coach-office with startop , who volunteered his company , to make inquiry when the next coach went down .
“ if you had waited another moment , biddy , you would have heard me say that i shall bring my clothes here in a bundle one evening , most likely on the evening before i go away .
” and at night his reading was lovely .
not the less , because i gave him my opinion that it was not safe to try to get tom , jack , or richard too far out of the way at present .
before we departed from that spot , four soldiers standing in a ring , fired twice into the air .
not but what he’s artful , even in his defiance of them .
there was no other merit in this , than my having sense enough to feel my deficiencies .
but as my business was with joe and not with him , i merely wished him good evening , and passed into the common room at the end of the passage , where there was a bright large kitchen fire , and where joe was smoking his pipe in company with mr wopsle and a stranger .
“ you are one of those , biddy , ” said i , “ who make the most of every chance .
“ what do you come snivelling here for ?
how much is forty-three pence ?
” exclaimed my sister .
“ just now .
after which , joe withdrew to the window , and stood with his back towards me , wiping his eyes .
so , lighting my candle at the watchman’s , and leaving him standing at the door , i examined them carefully , including the room in which my dreaded guest lay asleep .
“ allow me to lead the way .
they were in what is called a good position , and visited , and were visited by , numbers of people .
“ you don’t know ?
we walked to town , my sister leading the way in a very large beaver bonnet , and carrying a basket like the great seal of england in plaited straw , a pair of pattens , a spare shawl , and an umbrella , though it was a fine bright day .
besides , it’s absurd .
keeping miss havisham in the background at a great distance , i still hinted at the possibility of my having competed with him in his prospects , and at the certainty of his possessing a generous soul , and being far above any mean distrusts , retaliations , or designs .
“ they must ha’ thought better on’t for some reason or another , ” said the jack , “ and gone down .
“ did i never give her love !
while pumblechook himself , self-constituted my patron , would sit supervising me with a depreciatory eye , like the architect of my fortunes who thought himself engaged on a very unremunerative job .
expecting herbert all the time , i dared not go out , except when i took provis for an airing after dark .
but he found me , each time , with my yellow mug of tea on one knee , and my untouched bread and butter on the other .
“ can this be possible , uncle ?
“ thank god !
what has been my history , that i should be at the pains of entreating either them or you not to have it so !
he would want to help me out of his little savings , i knew , and i knew that he ought not to help me , and that i must not suffer him to do it .
“ and your sister , ” he resumed , after a little steady eating , “ which had the honour of bringing you up by hand !
“ see , then , ” said herbert ;
when i got up in the morning , refreshed and stronger yet , i was full of my resolution to tell joe all , without delay .
” he helplessly exclaimed to the elements .
and you have seen her still more recently .
but they wouldn’t leave me alone .
“ you gave it to yourself ;
then she vanished .
“ all i know of it ;
that’s my way .
” he returned , “ i’ll let you go .
“ i think i know the delights of freedom , ” i answered .
i never made them .
comprising the pen with which a celebrated forgery had been committed , a distinguished razor or two , some locks of hair , and several manuscript confessions written under condemnation , upon which mr wemmick set particular value as being , to use his own words , “ every one of ’em lies , sir .
pray make the best use of your time .
as it was , she merely stipulated , “ if you bring the boy back with his head blown to bits by a musket , don’t look to me to put it together again .
but i hope my reluctance was not quite an unworthy one .
“ name of clara , ” said herbert .
i have no hope that i shall ever call you mine , estella .
i judged him to be about my own age , but he was much taller , and he had a way of spinning himself about that was full of appearance .
i had first seen him when i sent for him to lay this place waste for me ;
“ not to say an unfeeling thing , ” said i , “ he cannot do better than go .
we came to richmond all too soon , and our destination there was a house by the green , a staid old house , where hoops and powder and patches , embroidered coats , rolled stockings , ruffles and swords , had had their court days many a time .
presently i saw his blue lips again , breathing on the tinder , and then a flare of light flashed up , and showed me orlick .
while he said these words in a leisurely , critical style , she continued to look at every one of us in regular succession as we sat .
that i sometimes struggled with real people , in the belief that they were murderers , and that i would all at once comprehend that they meant to do me good , and would then sink exhausted in their arms , and suffer them to lay me down , i also knew at the time .
“ since it don’t interfere with business , ” returned wemmick , “ let it be so .
herbert was there , and startop was there ;
so he told it , and herbert was as much moved as amazed , and the dear fellow and i were not the worse friends for the long concealment .
which was when she was waiting for mrs blandley to take her home , and was sitting apart among some flowers , ready to go .
one , the younger , well brought up , who will be spoke to as such ;
“ that , ” he returned , “ is my deliberate opinion in this office .
when you told me your own story , you told me plainly that you began adoring her the first time you saw her , when you were very young indeed .
if you mean to take a present that i have it in charge to make you , speak out , and you shall have it .
but the question is , what do you say of it ?
i opened the door to the company , making believe that it was a habit of ours to open that door , and i opened it first to mr wopsle , next to mr and mrs hubble , and last of all to uncle pumblechook .
he gave me no such excuse , and each of us did the other justice .
it was a case of jealousy .
that he would be leniently treated , i could not hope .
that’s her father .
but there was something so conclusive in the halo of scented soap which encircled his presence , that they gave it up for that day .
however , in the confusion of the mist , i found myself at last too far to the right , and consequently had to try back along the river-side , on the bank of loose stones above the mud and the stakes that staked the tide out .
i verily believe that her not remembering and not minding in the least , made me cry again , inwardly , and that is the sharpest crying of all .
when we parted , i presented him with two guineas (which seemed to meet his views) , and told him that i was sorry ever to have had an ill opinion of him (which made no impression on him at all) .
his partner having prepared me for that , i was less surprised than he thought .
“ to do you mean to the young fellow who’s in it ?
why , i know’d you at gargery’s when you was so small a wolf that i could have took your weazen betwixt this finger and thumb and chucked you away dead (as i’d thoughts o’ doing , odd times , when i see you loitering amongst the pollards on a sunday) , and you hadn’t found no uncles then .
but it melted as i saw mr jaggers relax into something like a smile , and wemmick become bolder .
joe looked at me with a quivering lip , and fairly put his sleeve before his eyes .
she raised her eyes to my face , on being thus addressed , and her fingers plied their work , and she looked at me with an unmoved countenance .
“ what ?
put a name to it , mr gargery .
her shoes came up at the heel , her hair grew bright and neat , her hands were always clean .
dinner done and we sitting with our feet upon the fender , i said to herbert , “ my dear herbert , i have something very particular to tell you .
“ you can do that .
“ what have i done !
“ but would that be your opinion at walworth ?
he seemed to have no strength , and he never once hit me hard , and he was always knocked down ;
“ (how do you do , pip ?
he laid his hand on my shoulder .
” said i .
you little thought you was to be refreshment beneath this humble roof for one as call it a weakness , if you will , ” said mr pumblechook , getting up again , “ but may i ?
“ very much , ” said estella , looking at me .
she was a very handsome young woman , and i believe had some gypsy blood in her .
“ when did you come to town , mr gargery ?
this had lasted but a very short time , when mrs pocket issued summary orders that they were all to be taken into the house for a nap .
” returned the young lady , who was very pretty and seemed very proud ;
i never thought of making miss havisham any present .
“ and that , ” said i , “ is your deliberate opinion , mr wemmick ?
but if i had , this observation put it to flight .
in the meantime mr pocket grew greyer , and tried oftener to lift himself out of his perplexities by the hair .
we certainly had not been , and at that time as certainly we were not either attended or followed by any boat .
that is being very lucky .
whatever night-fancies and night-noises crowded on me , they never warded off this don’t go home .
at breakfast-time my sister declared her intention of going to town with us , and being left at uncle pumblechook’s and called for “ when we had done with our fine ladies ” a way of putting the case , from which joe appeared inclined to augur the worst .
that i was much more ignorant than i had considered myself last night , and generally that i was in a low-lived bad way .
even when we were groping among mr jaggers’s stock of boots for our hats , i felt that the right twin was on his way back ;
i counted up to high numbers , to make sure of myself , and repeated passages that i knew in prose and verse .
or rather , his narrative had given form and purpose to the fear that was already there .
hereupon , a choleric gentleman , who had taken the fourth place on that seat , flew into a most violent passion , and said that it was a breach of contract to mix him up with such villainous company , and that it was poisonous , and pernicious , and infamous , and shameful , and i don’t know what else .
“ so !
we had stopped near the centre of the long table , and miss havisham , with one of her withered arms stretched out of the chair , rested that clenched hand upon the yellow cloth .
“ so !
after mr pumblechook had driven off , and when my sister was washing up , i stole into the forge to joe , and remained by him until he had done for the night .
but she only pressed that hand of mine which was nearest to her grasp , and hung her head over it and wept .
if i had loved him instead of abhorring him ;
but ever afterwards , i remembered , and soon afterwards with stronger reason , that while estella looked at me merely with incredulous wonder , the spectral figure of miss havisham , her hand still covering her heart , seemed all resolved into a ghastly stare of pity and remorse .
” he said , touching it .
still my position was a distinguished one , and i was not at all dissatisfied with it , until fate threw me in the way of that unlimited miscreant , trabb’s boy .
daylight never entered the house as to my thoughts and remembrances of it , any more than as to the actual fact .
when we got to the foot of the stairs , i asked herbert whether he had preserved the name of provis .
then , i saw that his head was furrowed and bald , and that the long iron-grey hair grew only on its sides .
(“ spooney !
my sister , having so much to do , was going to church vicariously , that is to say , joe and i were going .
” i asked indignantly .
“ on the first floor , ” said herbert .
both mr and mrs pocket had such a noticeable air of being in somebody else’s hands , that i wondered who really was in possession of the house and let them live there , until i found this unknown power to be the servants .
it was christmas eve , and i had to stir the pudding for next day , with a copper-stick , from seven to eight by the dutch clock .
“ who’s he ?
i heard her steps proceed to the pantry .
for the tenderness of joe was so beautifully proportioned to my need , that i was like a child in his hands .
i had the happiness to know you in former times , and the drama has ever had a claim which has ever been acknowledged , on the noble and the affluent .
and we had not gone half a dozen yards down gerrard street in the walworth direction , before i found that i was walking arm in arm with the right twin , and that the wrong twin had evaporated into the evening air .
” returned estella , with her eyes on me instead .
“ at the rate of , sir ?
“ would you give me the time ?
i hope mr jaggers admires it ?
but he now reclined on his settle , taking very little notice of me , and talking principally about turnips .
soon dried .
“ i should think from the colour of his clothes that he is working in the quarries .
biddy held one of my hands to her lips , and joe’s restoring touch was on my shoulder .
“ compeyson .
wemmick came down to the door with me , and i again shook hands with him , and wished him joy .
” said the sergeant , staring at joe .
it was so with all of us , but with no one more than drummle :
a bride-cake .
as i sat down , and he preserved his attitude and bent his brows at his boots , i felt at a disadvantage , which reminded me of that old time when i had been put upon a tombstone .
“ and yet it looked so like it , sir , ” i pleaded with a downcast heart .
” interrupted biddy , looking closely at the leaf in her hand .
” as if i had besought them as a favour to bother my life out .
your health .
and now i , sitting in the stern , could see , with a faster beating heart , mill pond bank and mill pond stairs .
” he asked , in reply .
it was full of people ;
“ your sister is given to government .
i don’t deny that your sister comes the mo-gul over us , now and again .
i begged joe to be comforted , for (as he said) we had ever been the best of friends , and (as i said) we ever would be so .
again he took both my hands and put them to his lips , while my blood ran cold within me .
if ever anybody’s hair stood on end with terror , mine must have done so then .
“ why , yes , sir , ” said joe , “ me and wopsle went off straight to look at the blacking ware’us .
soon afterwards , biddy , joe , and i , had a cold dinner together ;
and from that corner , surveying the public with a discontented eye , became aware of me .
” i nodded harder .
“ which i do assure you , pip , ” he would often say , in explanation of that liberty ;
and the mere sight of the torment , with his fishy eyes and mouth open , his sandy hair inquisitively on end , and his waistcoat heaving with windy arithmetic , made me vicious in my reticence .
there’s some of the birds flown from the cages .
“ my dear mr pip :
“ am i to come again , miss havisham ?
” mr pumblechook added , after a short interval of reflection , “ look at pork alone .
“ two one-pound notes ?
but i felt morally and physically convinced that his light head of hair could have had no business in the pit of my stomach , and that i had a right to consider it irrelevant when so obtruded on my attention .
i added , that of course , when the time came , i should go with him , or should follow close upon him , as might be safest in wemmick’s judgment .
but after i had had my new suit on some half an hour , and had gone through an immensity of posturing with mr pumblechook’s very limited dressing-glass , in the futile endeavour to see my legs , it seemed to fit me better .
there stood the man whom i had seen on the settle at the three jolly bargemen on a saturday night , and who had brought me down with his invisible gun !
speak !
“ yes .
this was not a very ceremonious way of rendering homage to a patron saint , but i believe old clem stood in that relation towards smiths .
i knew to my sorrow , often and often , if not always , that i loved her against reason , against promise , against peace , against hope , against happiness , against all discouragement that could be .
hard by was a small stone-quarry .
mr pocket , junior’s , idea of shortly was not mine , for i had nearly maddened myself with looking out for half an hour , and had written my name with my finger several times in the dirt of every pane in the window , before i heard footsteps on the stairs .
after the blows were dealt , something heavy had been thrown down at her with considerable violence , as she lay on her face .
“ i shouldn’t mind anything that you propose , ” i answered , “ but i don’t understand you .
would i find out that boy that had fed him and kep his secret , and give him them two one pound notes ?
“ there comes the darkest part of provis’s life .
and that’s all i have got to say .
what was it ?
“ at half-past nine , gentlemen , ” said he , “ we must break up .
“ but as she grew , and promised to be very beautiful , i gradually did worse , and with my praises , and with my jewels , and with my teachings , and with this figure of myself always before her , a warning to back and point my lessons , i stole her heart away , and put ice in its place .
“ it’s five-and-twenty pound , mum , ” echoed that basest of swindlers , pumblechook , rising to shake hands with her ;
i drew joe away , and he immediately became placable ;
i thought it polite to remark that i was surprised to hear that .
estella’s father would believe i had deserted him , would be taken , would die accusing me ;
he lay in prison very ill , during the whole interval between his committal for trial and the coming round of the sessions .
then , the ends of the torches were flung hissing into the water , and went out , as if it were all over with him .
you had not your little wits sharpened by their intriguing against you , suppressed and defenceless , under the mask of sympathy and pity and what not that is soft and soothing .
“ when he come to the grave , ” said our conductor , “ he showed his cloak beautiful .
“ n-no , my dear boy , ” said herbert , after taking time to examine me .
old orlick knowed you was burnt , old orlick knowed you was smuggling your uncle provis away , old orlick’s a match for you and know’d you’d come to-night !
for i felt that i had done rather a great thing in making the request .
“ ah !
“ yes , but look’ee here , ” he persisted .
after darkly looking at his leg and me several times , he came closer to my tombstone , took me by both arms , and tilted me back as far as he could hold me ;
” not a doubt of that i thought .
when i saw her again , an hour afterwards , she lay , indeed , where i had seen her strike her stick , and had heard her say that she would lie one day .
” as i did not like him either , i took the liberty of saying that we thanked him , but we didn’t want seeing home .
runaways !
mr wopsle said grace with theatrical declamation , as it now appears to me , something like a religious cross of the ghost in hamlet with richard the third , and ended with the very proper aspiration that we might be truly grateful .
when i left , estella was yet standing by the great chimney-piece , just as she had stood throughout .
it was a consequence of his hurt that he spoke so low as to be scarcely audible ;
you hear ?
“ not till it got about that there was no protection on the premises , and it come to be considered dangerous , with convicts and tag and rag and bobtail going up and down .
but not quite , for they never did it .
there were picnics , fête days , plays , operas , concerts , parties , all sorts of pleasures , through which i pursued her , and they were all miseries to me .
i’d sell all the friends i ever had for one , and think it a blessed good bargain .
nobody thought of me .
and the worst was , that i must decide quickly , or i should miss the afternoon coach , which would take me down in time for to-night .
and all friends is no backerder , if not no forarder .
“ now , i tell you what !
oh !
again among the tiers of shipping , in and out , avoiding rusty chain-cables frayed hempen hawsers and bobbing buoys , sinking for the moment floating broken baskets , scattering floating chips of wood and shaving , cleaving floating scum of coal , in and out , under the figure-head of the john of sunderland making a speech to the winds (as is done by many johns) , and the betsy of yarmouth with a firm formality of bosom and her knobby eyes starting two inches out of her head ;
cover him steady , men !’ and is laid hands on and there’s nothin’ !
and i hinted at the danger that weighed upon my spirits .
we got aboard easily , and rowed out into the track of the steamer .
and they fired warning of him .
wemmick should walk round with me , if i pleased .
but compeyson , who had meant to depose to it , was tumbling on the tides , dead , and it happened that there was not at that time any prison officer in london who could give the required evidence .
again , not a very difficult condition with which to encumber such a rise in fortune ;
and sarah pocket’s there !
“ i am not paid , pip , ” said he , coolly , “ to carry your words to any one ;
when we passed through hammersmith , i showed her where mr matthew pocket lived , and said it was no great way from richmond , and that i hoped i should see her sometimes .
the blood horses of them colonists might fling up the dust over me as i was walking ;
“ is he in london ?
but he would be up again in a moment , sponging himself or drinking out of the water-bottle , with the greatest satisfaction in seconding himself according to form , and then came at me with an air and a show that made me believe he really was going to do for me at last .
mr wopsle dropped in to ask what was the matter (surmising that a convict had been taken) , but came running out in a great hurry .
“ what’ll you drink , mr gargery ?
i had known him the moment i saw him looking over the settle , and now that i stood confronting him with his hand upon my shoulder , i checked off again in detail his large head , his dark complexion , his deep-set eyes , his bushy black eyebrows , his large watch-chain , his strong black dots of beard and whisker , and even the smell of scented soap on his great hand .
” repeated biddy , striking in , with a momentary flush upon her face .
the strange gentleman beckoned him out of his place , and joe went .
i foresaw that , being convicted , his possessions would be forfeited to the crown .
“ i hope so .
” to which the aged replied with great briskness , before saying that he gave , “ all right , john , all right , my boy !
mike looked hard at my guardian , as if he were trying to learn a lesson from his face , and slowly replied , “ ayther to character , or to having been in his company and never left him all the night in question .
it was in the early morning after my arrival that i entertained this speculation .
“ no , ” said he , looking as if he hardly understood me .
and as though it were quite an old subject of remembrance , instead of one that had arisen only that day .
but there was recompense in the joy with which herbert would come home of a night and tell me of these changes , little imagining that he told me no news , and would sketch airy pictures of himself conducting clara barley to the land of the arabian nights , and of me going out to join them (with a caravan of camels , i believe) , and of our all going up the nile and seeing wonders .
i looked all round for the horrible young man , and could see no signs of him .
on the other hand , trabb’s boy might worm himself into his intimacy and tell him things ;
“ yes ;
it was this , i conceive , which led to the shade’s being advised by the gallery to “ turn over !
” said i .
“ you are not angry with me , joe ?
it is not my secret , but another’s .
in the outer office wemmick offered me his congratulations , and incidentally rubbed the side of his nose with a folded piece of tissue-paper that i liked the look of .
“ miss havisham ?
“ what did you say ?
with her character thus happily formed , in the first bloom of her youth she had encountered mr pocket :
oh !
“ perhaps i was not , ” she answered , putting a hand to her head .
“ churchyard , indeed !
i had cherished a profound conviction that her bringing me up by hand gave her no right to bring me up by jerks .
not having my reason for attaching weight to it .
“ mr drummle , ” said i , “ you are not competent to give advice on that subject .
i tried to rest him on the arm i could use , in any easy position ;
“ only a little tired of myself , ” replied estella , disengaging her arm , and moving to the great chimney-piece , where she stood looking down at the fire .
but she had shared some four or five years of the wretched life he described to us at this fireside , and he seems to have felt pity for her , and forbearance towards her .
the strange gentleman , with an air of authority not to be disputed , and with a manner expressive of knowing something secret about every one of us that would effectually do for each individual if he chose to disclose it , left the back of the settle , and came into the space between the two settles , in front of the fire , where he remained standing , his left hand in his pocket , and he biting the forefinger of his right .
yes , i would .
by this time we had come to the house , where i found his room to be one just within the side-door , with a little window in it looking on the courtyard .
“ i hope , ” said i , hurriedly putting something into a glass for myself , and drawing a chair to the table , “ that you will not think i spoke harshly to you just now .
one , the elder , ill brought up , who will be spoke to as such ;
her father was a country gentleman down in your part of the world , and was a brewer .
“ compeyson laughed , looked at me again very noticing , giv me five shillings , and appointed me for next night .
“ well , mr pip , i think the sooner you leave here as you are to be a gentleman the better .
i think it must have been a full year after our hunt upon the marshes , for it was a long time after , and it was winter and a hard frost .
” asked biddy , with a steady sort of glance .
i found , on questioning the servants , that estella was in paris , and i got a promise from the surgeon that he would write to her by the next post .
“ next thing to it , ” returned wemmick , “ i am going to newgate .
“ hah !
“ o , not nearly so much .
they passed by under the window , looking at nothing else , and they did not go down to the landing-place which i could discern to be empty , but struck across the marsh in the direction of the nore .
“ oh !
ain’t it ?
and his watch is a gold repeater , and worth a hundred pound if it’s worth a penny .
“ the time has not gone by , herbert , has it ?
” and i asked herbert whether his father was so inveterate against her ?
and then as they went out , with one very strong effort to lift himself up by the hair he dismissed the hopeless subject .
hey ?
chapter liv .
“ o , i wouldn’t , if i was you !
“ i should not have told her no , if i had been you , ” said mr jaggers ;
“ what have i done !
it was like pushing the chair itself back into the past , when we began the old slow circuit round about the ashes of the bridal feast .
these people hated me with the hatred of cupidity and disappointment .
and finding that some wind had blown her here , i followed .
” returned the jack .
“ yes , i suppose so .
“ and please , what’s hulks ?
it was abandoned as soon as tried , and he wore his grizzled hair cut short .
such was my purpose .
many a moral for the young , ” returned mr wopsle , and i knew he was going to lug me in , before he said it ;
and when i set the doors open and looked down the staircase , the staircase lamps were blown out ;
“ you can say what you like , ” returned the sergeant , standing coolly looking at him with his arms folded , “ but you have no call to say it here .
“ pip , dear old chap , life is made of ever so many partings welded together , as i may say , and one man’s a blacksmith , and one’s a whitesmith , and one’s a goldsmith , and one’s a coppersmith .
his right name was compeyson ;
“ very superior indeed .
not that i have any occasion to tell you anything , for you know everything i know , as i told you at home the other night .
as soon as this volume began to circulate , mr wopsle’s great-aunt fell into a state of coma , arising either from sleep or a rheumatic paroxysm .
“ not to-morrow .
” and then i kissed my sister who was laughing and nodding and shaking in her usual chair , and kissed biddy , and threw my arms around joe’s neck .
don’t you ?
“ is he dead ?
“ was anybody else there ?
“ i am glad to see you , joe .
what is it you call him ?
i escaped to the shore , and i was a hiding among the graves there , envying them as was in ’em and all over , when i first see my boy !
although i saw him every day , it was for only a short time ;
“ and what i say to you is , you are right , pip .
he came round at the appointed time , took out his jackknife , and sat down to his meal .
words cannot tell what a sense i had , at the same time , of the dreadful mystery that he was to me .
let me remember , then , what he said as to that .
“ o joe , you break my heart !
of course i made no further effort to refer to it .
and i rather suspected that a classic brooch she wore , representing the profile of an undesirable female with a very straight nose and a very new moon , was a piece of portable property that had been given her by wemmick .
bring this with you .
“ i think i’ve got a bright new shilling somewhere in my pocket , and if i have , the boy shall have it .
nor did i ever regard him as having anything ludicrous about him or anything but what was serious , honest , and good in his tutor communication with me .
it’s something to have seen the object of one’s love and duty for even so short a time .
i felt his hand tremble as it held mine , and he turned his face away as he lay in the bottom of the boat , and i heard that old sound in his throat , softened now , like all the rest of him .
” said she .
it was but a day gone , and joe had brought the tears into my eyes ;
having a belief in its virtues correspondent to its nastiness .
“ biddy , what do you mean ?
i say we went over , but i was pushed over by pumblechook , exactly as if i had that moment picked a pocket or fired a rick ;
“ i wonder he didn’t marry her and get all the property , ” said i .
besides , there had been no altercation ;
but finally went on his knees to his sponge and threw it up :
“ i am sure , uncle , ” returned mrs joe , “ i wish you had him always ;
“ are you tired , estella ?
“ lookee here , dear boy , ” said he “ it’s best as a gentleman should not be knowed to belong to me now .
i went on with my breakfast , and mr pumblechook continued to stand over me , staring fishily and breathing noisily , as he always did .
the moment they sprang there , the girl looked at me with a quick delight in having been the cause of them .
“ i shall not tell you .
and then i saw biddy come , and bring him a pipe and light it for him .
“ don’t put it off upon me .
wrote in print even !
as to you , ” joe pursued with a countenance expressive of seeing something very nasty indeed , “ if you could have been aware how small and flabby and mean you was , dear me , you’d have formed the most contemptible opinion of yourself !
“ he calls the knaves jacks , this boy !
“ good .
however , go to miss havisham’s i must , and go i did .
with that , she pounced upon me , like an eagle on a lamb , and my face was squeezed into wooden bowls in sinks , and my head was put under taps of water-butts , and i was soaped , and kneaded , and towelled , and thumped , and harrowed , and rasped , until i really was quite beside myself .
though i dropped again from the pain in my arm .
much comforted by these considerations , i thanked wemmick again and again , and begged him to proceed .
i really believe joe would have prolonged this word (mightily expressive to my mind of some architecture that i know) into a perfect chorus , but for his attention being providentially attracted by his hat , which was toppling .
“ dear me !
“ that’s no question as it stands , you know .
“ you ?
but we neither of us said anything , and both looked at provis as he stood smoking by the fire .
“ joseph !
” said mr wemmick , looking at me with an approving air .
as to leading me into what you call this fatal step , miss havisham would have had me wait , and not marry yet ;
n .b .
couldn’t you stretch a point and manage it ?
we begin to close in upon ’em about dusk .
“ estella , ” said i , “ do look at that fellow in the corner yonder , who is looking over here at us .
“ ah !
when i first went into it , and , rather oppressed by its gloom , stood near the door looking about me , i saw her pass among the extinguished fires , and ascend some light iron stairs , and go out by a gallery high overhead , as if she were going out into the sky .
“ that is the man , ” said mr jaggers , “ in new south wales .
now , turn to that paper , and tell me whether it distinctly states that the prisoner expressly said that his legal advisers instructed him altogether to reserve his defence ?
we changed , and i had not made up my mind , and still reflected for my comfort that it would be quite practicable to get down and walk back , when we changed again .
but this time his motion was rotatory , and he staggered round and round me with knees more afflicted , and with uplifted hands as if beseeching for mercy .
once more , the mists were rising as i walked away .
” down banks and up banks , and over gates , and splashing into dikes , and breaking among coarse rushes :
“ it is in my nature , ” she returned .
at the best of times , so much of this elixir was administered to me as a choice restorative , that i was conscious of going about , smelling like a new fence .
ask no questions , and you’ll be told no lies .
and it appeared to me that wemmick was a good person to advise with concerning such thought .
that discreet damsel was attired as usual , except that she was now engaged in substituting for her green kid gloves a pair of white .
when i lose my temper (not that i admit having done so on that occasion) , i don’t throw glasses .
i had been looking round , in fact , for estella , and i stammered that i hoped she was well .
there mustn’t be no mud on his boots .
you know your way , sir ?
writes my letters , wolf !
the waiter appeared to be particularly affected .
she made it a powerful merit in herself , and a strong reproach against joe , that she wore this apron so much .
maybe i’m a growing a trifle old besides .
i must ask him point blank .
“ which i fully believed it were , pip , ” said joe , slightly tossing his head , “ though it signify little now , sir .
i had been waiting for him to see me that i might try to assure him of my innocence .
when the prosecution opened and the evidence was put short , aforehand , i noticed how heavy it all bore on me , and how light on him .
namely .
that he drooped when he came into dinner ;
“ how do i know it , handel ?
speak , wolf !
wait till things slacken , before you try the open , even for foreign air .
and she was as scornful of me as if she had been one-and-twenty , and a queen .
“ yes .
“ if you knowed , dear boy , ” he said to me , “ what it is to sit here alonger my dear boy and have my smoke , arter having been day by day betwixt four walls , you’d envy me .
i wanted to make joe less ignorant and common , that he might be worthier of my society and less open to estella’s reproach .
“ i have seen mr jaggers .
“ whose ?
we traversed but one side of the square , however , and at the end of it she stopped , and put her candle down and opened a door .
which was a change very like joe’s change from his working-clothes to his sunday dress .
with barnard’s inn and the date very carefully added .
i have been bent and broken , but i hope into a better shape .
when joe and i got home , we found the table laid , and mrs joe dressed , and the dinner dressing , and the front door unlocked (it never was at any other time) for the company to enter by , and everything most splendid .
what was it that was borne in upon my mind when she stood still and looked attentively at me ?
much as i know’d the birds’ names in the hedges to be chaffinch , sparrer , thrush .
won’t us ?
and did you take milk ?
i held tight to the leg of the table under the cloth , with both hands , and awaited my fate .
” i thought .
it had been a fine bright day , but had become foggy as the sun dropped , and i had had to feel my way back among the shipping , pretty carefully .
well ?
chapter xli .
and whenever such a sound came , one or other of us was sure to start , and look in that direction .
and now , because my mind was not confused enough before , i complicated its confusion fifty thousand-fold , by having states and seasons when i was clear that biddy was immeasurably better than estella , and that the plain honest working life to which i was born had nothing in it to be ashamed of , but offered me sufficient means of self-respect and happiness .
“ flags !
my former chill crept over me again , but i was resolved not to speak yet , for it was quite consistent with his words that he might be set on to induce me to connect these references with provis .
“ i wish i could !
after a while , we had so run it down , that we could hear one voice calling “ murder !
we stood in the inn yard while she pointed out her luggage to me , and when it was all collected i remembered having forgotten everything but herself in the meanwhile that i knew nothing of her destination .
i thought of her having said , “ matthew will come and see me at last when i am laid dead upon that table ;
but i always supposed it was miss havisham .
i got away from him , without knowing how i did it , and mended the fire in the room where we had been together , and sat down by it , afraid to go to bed .
to stand in the dark in a mysterious passage of an unknown house , bawling estella to a scornful young lady neither visible nor responsive , and feeling it a dreadful liberty so to roar out her name , was almost as bad as playing to order .
as i was not able to cut my dinner , the old landlord with a shining bald head did it for me .
and the cattle , their heads turned from the wind and sleet , stared angrily as if they held us responsible for both annoyances ;
but , there were few better oarsmen than my two friends , and they rowed with a steady stroke that was to last all day .
to satis house , as usual .
but don’t lose your temper .
let him have something to eat , and let him roam and look about him while he eats .
o dear good joe , whom i was so ready to leave and so unthankful to , i see you again , with your muscular blacksmith’s arm before your eyes , and your broad chest heaving , and your voice dying away .
“ i don’t complain of none , dear boy .
“ it’s all very true !
is that it ?
“ i have an impending engagement , ” said i , glancing at wemmick , who was putting fish into the post-office , “ that renders me rather uncertain of my time .
“ because i mean to do it all myself .
“ the man says , ” joe assented .
” and camilla add , with indignation , “ was there ever such a fancy !
“ keep off !
and she had a long white veil dependent from her hair , and she had bridal flowers in her hair , but her hair was white .
“ arter a deal o’ trouble , i’ve found one , sir , as might do .
“ it’s just gone half past two .
” said joe .
“ just a mile , ” said mrs joe .
i moved the table , like a medium of the present day , by the vigor of my unseen hold upon it .
i released my hands as soon as i could , and found that i was beginning slowly to settle down to the contemplation of my condition .
“ is he never robbed ?
i didn’t mean to be .
the neighbourhood , however , highly approved of these arrangements , and we were much admired as we went through the village ;
he cherished an extraordinary belief in the virtues of “ shorts ” as a disguise , and had in his own mind sketched a dress for himself that would have made him something between a dean and a dentist .
then let him know that there is urgent reason for your getting provis aboard and away .
i went softly towards it , meaning to peep over the flowers , when joe and biddy stood before me , arm in arm .
“ there , again !
avoiding forbidden ground , as you did just now , i may still say that on the constancy of one person (naming no person) all my expectations depend .
pray let me hear you say the words , that i may carry the sound of them away with me , and then i shall be able to believe that you can trust me , and think better of me , in the time to come !
“ that i cannot wish to renew that chance intercourse with you of long ago , under these different circumstances .
i remained quiet .
“ yes , ma’am .
“ the idea of its being you !
there was something comic in his distraught way , as though it would have been downright ludicrous but for his own perception that it was very near being so .
whom i had looked for , i don’t know .
so he went round the room and shook the curtains out , put the chairs in their places , tidied the books and so forth that were lying about , looked into the hall , peeped into the letter-box , shut the door , and came back to his chair by the fire :
as he was fast making jam of his fruit by wrestling with the door while the paper-bags were under his arms , i begged him to allow me to hold them .
you address nothing in my breast , you touch nothing there .
saving for the one weird smile at first , i should have felt almost sure that miss havisham’s face could not smile .
“ i have gone off into that state , hours and hours , on account of matthew’s strange and inexplicable conduct , and nobody has thanked me .
“ very well , ” said mr jaggers .
that this woman was so very artfully dressed from the time of her apprehension , that she looked much slighter than she really was ;
“ you have not every reason to say so of the rest of his people , ” said estella , nodding at me with an expression of face that was at once grave and rallying , “ for they beset miss havisham with reports and insinuations to your disadvantage .
“ a few steps , please .
” said the man .
but it is indisputable that while you cannot possibly be genteel and bake , you may be as genteel as never was and brew .
“ yes .
it were yesterday afternoon ” (with an appearance of mingled wisdom , relief , and strict impartiality) .
“ biddy , ” said i , “ i made a remark respecting my coming down here often , to see joe , which you received with a marked silence .
the moon began to rise , and i thought of the placid look at the white ceiling , which had passed away .
“ and that same man , remember , ” pursued the gentleman , throwing his finger at mr wopsle heavily , “ that same man might be summoned as a juryman upon this very trial , and , having thus deeply committed himself , might return to the bosom of his family and lay his head upon his pillow , after deliberately swearing that he would well and truly try the issue joined between our sovereign lord the king and the prisoner at the bar , and would a true verdict give according to the evidence , so help him god !
i further mentioned that as i had been brought up a blacksmith in a country place , and knew very little of the ways of politeness , i would take it as a great kindness in him if he would give me a hint whenever he saw me at a loss or going wrong .
mr wemmick and i parted at the office in little britain , where suppliants for mr jaggers’s notice were lingering about as usual , and i returned to my watch in the street of the coach-office , with some three hours on hand .
joe scooped his eyes with his disengaged wrist , as if he were bent on gouging himself , but said not another word .
“ yes , joe .
i represented myself as being surely worthy of some little confidence from him , in return for the confidence i had just now imparted .
we touched the stairs lightly for a single moment , and he was on board , and we were off again .
” (i thought this pretty well in him who had been praising up the pork for being so plump and juicy .) “ what is detestable in a pig is more detestable in a boy .
nor do i recollect that i questioned its merit , except that i thought (as i still do) the amount of too rul somewhat in excess of the poetry .
herbert said he thought it would be kind to do so ;
the day after to-morrow , if you please .
i resolved to go out to richmond next day , and i went .
“ you did that , and that would be enough , without more .
who’s the spider ?
herbert and i went on from bad to worse , in the way of increasing our debts , looking into our affairs , leaving margins , and the like exemplary transactions ;
and departed with the words reproachfully delivered :
what could the wretched joe do now , after his disregarded parenthetical interruptions , but stand up to his journeyman , and ask him what he meant by interfering betwixt himself and mrs joe ;
” asked the turnkey , with a grin at mr wemmick’s humour .
chapter lv .
for you do not know that uncle pumblechook , being sensible that for anything we can tell , this boy’s fortune may be made by his going to miss havisham’s , has offered to take him into town to-night in his own chaise-cart , and to keep him to-night , and to take him with his own hands to miss havisham’s to-morrow morning .
she’s flighty , you know , very flighty , quite flighty enough to pass her days in a sedan-chair .
but , looking round , i found the governor of the prison standing near me , and he whispered , “ you needn’t go yet .
“ you have just come down ?
i had so much time to spare , that the proposal came as a relief , notwithstanding its irreconcilability with my latent desire to keep my eye on the coach-office .
i lay in that separate building across the courtyard .
why should i pause to ask how much of my shrinking from provis might be traced to estella ?
“ now , ” he pursued , “ you remember what you’ve undertook , and you remember that young man , and you get home !
“ calls me proud and inflexible in this breath !
” as if it were a well-known fact that i contemplated murdering a near relation , provided i could only induce one to have the weakness to become my benefactor .
i wondered how many other clerks there were upstairs , and whether they all claimed to have the same detrimental mastery of their fellow-creatures .
” said mr pumblechook , in the way of a compassionate adjuration .
he was to remain shut up in the chambers while i was gone , and was on no account to open the door .
that’ll do .
who , on the first stocking coming off , would certainly have fallen over backward with his chair , but for there being no room to fall anyhow .
supposed by convicts .
the sun had been shining brightly all day on the roof of my attic , and the room was warm .
in another moment we were in the brewery , so long disused , and she pointed to the high gallery where i had seen her going out on that same first day , and told me she remembered to have been up there , and to have seen me standing scared below .
“ faithful dear boy , well done .
i made it in a moment .
“ dressed like you , you know , only with a hat , ” i explained , trembling ;
wemmick stood with his watch in his hand until the moment was come for him to take the red-hot poker from the aged , and repair to the battery .
“ o !
“ is he changed ?
may i venture to congratulate you ?
so , i rubbed it off with all possible speed by turning into a street where i saw the great black dome of saint paul’s bulging at me from behind a grim stone building which a bystander said was newgate prison .
biddy sat quietly sewing , shedding no more tears , and while i looked at her and thought about it all , it occurred to me that perhaps i had not been sufficiently grateful to biddy .
i laid down my pen , and biddy stopped in her needlework without laying it down .
as foreign steamers would leave london at about the time of high-water , our plan would be to get down the river by a previous ebb-tide , and lie by in some quiet spot until we could pull off to one .
though the whole strain was so subdued , even when there were three of us , that it made less noise in the grim old house than the lightest breath of wind .
where do you think i am going to ?
“ what is it that i manage ?
we should know at what time to expect them , according to where we were , and would hail the first ;
she was seated on the ground , with her arms on the ragged chair , and her head leaning on them .
nothing less than the frosty light of the cheerful sky , the sight of people passing beyond the bars of the court-yard gate , and the reviving influence of the rest of the bread and meat and beer , would have brought me round .
there are five-and-twenty guineas in this bag .
this brought us to the dinner-table , where she and sarah pocket awaited us .
that’s the grand thing .
” it scarcely sounded flattering , but i knew she meant well .
“ it’s nothing , pip .
i half expected to see him drop down before my face and die of deadly cold .
“ i swear i don’t see him here , ” said i .
but that he was not to be , without ignorance or prejudice , mistaken for a gentleman , my father most strongly asseverates ;
what i have to do as the confidential agent of another , i do .
made them (as herbert had said) a most disagreeable and degraded spectacle .
i could have posted a newspaper in his mouth , he made it so wide after saying this .
then , i left my boat at a wharf near the custom house , to be brought up afterwards to the temple stairs .
i do not recollect that i once saw any change in it for the better ;
“ didn’t you ever go to school , joe , when you were as little as me ?
but in that habitual way of hers , she put me so entirely out of the question , that i could believe nothing of the kind .
it had been placed there since my last visit , and i entered , that same day , on a regular occupation of pushing miss havisham in this chair (when she was tired of walking with her hand upon my shoulder) round her own room , and across the landing , and round the other room .
is that it ?
and when you hear him go , i think you’ll say he’s a stinger .
let him profit by the means as i found out ?
chapter xlvii .
the june weather was delicious .
“ the days have worn away , have they ?
i noticed throughout , that he kept everything under his own hand , and distributed everything himself .
when adopted ?
“ how did you like my reading of the character , gentlemen ?
to my thinking , there was something in him that made it hopeless to attempt to disguise him .
as i had asked for a night-light , the chamberlain had brought me in , before he left me , the good old constitutional rushlight of those virtuous days an object like the ghost of a walking-cane , which instantly broke its back if it were touched , which nothing could ever be lighted at , and which was placed in solitary confinement at the bottom of a high tin tower , perforated with round holes that made a staringly wide-awake pattern on the walls .
“ and you remember that there was a chase after two convicts , and that we joined in it , and that gargery took you on his back , and that i took the lead , and you kept up with me as well as you could ?
” said mrs joe , restoring tickler to his station .
i touched it so softly that i was not heard , and looked in unseen .
she looked towards miss havisham , and considered for a moment with her work in her hands .
he would call at barnard’s hotel tuesday morning at nine o’clock , when if not agreeable please leave word .
positively laughing !
“ to think , ” said mr pumblechook , after snorting admiration at me for some moments , “ that i should have been the humble instrument of leading up to this , is a proud reward .
” said she , smartly , as she put down her cup .
“ amen !
which was not at all what i meant , for i had intended my question to apply to his means .
come again after six days .
“ yes , ma’am , ” i said again , with the same object as before .
it’s a freehold , by george !
he had prepared a collation for me in the barnwell parlour , and he too ordered his shopman to “ come out of the gangway ” as my sacred person passed .
they wore the dress that i likewise knew well .
just as simply faithful , and as simply right .
“ to hear the names he’s giving me !
and when we were out of it , i was as much dazed for a few moments as if i had been in lightning .
i wrote , however , to mr trabb by next day’s post , to say that mr pip must decline to deal further with one who could so far forget what he owed to the best interests of society , as to employ a boy who excited loathing in every respectable mind .
it was you , joe .
which side he was on i couldn’t make out , for he seemed to me to be grinding the whole place in a mill ;
“ do this look like a forge ?
for a while , i hid myself among some lanes and by-paths , and then struck off to walk all the way to london .
those i carried in a sling ;
then i looked at my watch , and , finding that it was past nine , called again , “ is there any one here ?
otherwise , while i was scared by the immensity of london , i think i might have had some faint doubts whether it was not rather ugly , crooked , narrow , and dirty .
biddy was waiting for me at the kitchen door , with a mug of new milk and a crust of bread .
“ when did i ?
“ i want to know what you make it .
this was horrible , and gave me a sickening idea of london ;
“ for whose sake would you reveal the secret ?
go on , please .
in particular , her sleeves are always remembered to have been so skilfully contrived that her arms had quite a delicate look .
” said i .
“ did i ?
this may i , meant might he shake hands ?
“ not personally , ” said i .
” calling me back , and speaking low .
you know so well how to deal with him .
his manner was so final , and i was so astonished , that i followed where he led , as if i had been under a spell .
” though he spoke in this light tone , he was very much in earnest , “ i have been thinking since we have been talking with our feet on this fender , that estella surely cannot be a condition of your inheritance , if she was never referred to by your guardian .
and when the day came , and an open carriage was got into the lane , joe wrapped me up , took me in his arms , carried me down to it , and put me in , as if i were still the small helpless creature to whom he had so abundantly given of the wealth of his great nature .
but , above all , i knew that there was a constant tendency in all these people , who , when i was very ill , would present all kinds of extraordinary transformations of the human face , and would be much dilated in size , above all , i say , i knew that there was an extraordinary tendency in all these people , sooner or later , to settle down into the likeness of joe .
“ and couldn’t she ask uncle pumblechook if he knew of a boy to go and play there ?
” said joe , looking at it with a slow , searching eye , “ one , two , three .
and here to-morrow’s for hamburg , under whose bowsprit we crossed .
we dined very well , and were waited on by a maid-servant whom i had never seen in all my comings and goings , but who , for anything i know , had been in that mysterious house the whole time .
don’t be absurd .
it pinted out this writing , joseph .
i had a double-caped great-coat on , and over my arm another thick coat .
then , i said i supposed he had a fine business , and wemmick said , “ ca-pi-tal !
“ why , we are not going fishing !
chapter xv .
“ burn me , if i know !
” assented miss sarah pocket .
” and then looked all round the room , and paused with his pocket-handkerchief in his hand , half-way to his nose .
he should say a working person ;
“ i’m a-going , ” said he , bringing his fist down upon the table with a heavy blow , and rising as the blow fell to give it greater force , “ i’m a-going to have your life !
“ convicts , sergeant ?
when i had got rid of him , which i thought it well to do without prolonging explanations , my mind was much troubled by these two circumstances taken together .
i was so very nervous , that i had already lighted the aged’s sausage like a torch , and been obliged to blow it out .
when her light appeared , i returned to miss havisham , and we started away again round and round the room .
never had i seen such passionate eagerness as was joined to her utterance of these words .
remarking to herbert that he and i had better not go home together , and that i would take half an hour’s start of him .
“ it was understood that you wanted nothing for yourself , remember ?
i had thought of that too , and it was very far from comforting to me to find that he had thought of it ;
this is my little bedroom ;
“ mr pip , ” said wemmick , “ i should like just to run over with you on my fingers , if you please , the names of the various bridges up as high as chelsea reach .
i received this letter by the post on monday morning , and therefore its appointment was for next day .
but answer the question , ” said mr jaggers .
“ out of my thoughts !
i didn’t know how i had done it , but i had no doubt i had murdered him somehow .
“ are infants to be nut-crackered into their tombs , and is nobody to save them ?
“ i think so !
” repeated the landlord .
he had replaced his neckerchief loosely , and had stood , keenly observant of me , biting a long end of it .
we believe that quintin matsys was the blacksmith of antwerp .
“ if i could buy the furniture now hired for me , ” said i , “ and one or two other little things , i should be quite at home there .
if the villain had stopped here , his case would have been sufficiently awful , but he blackened his guilt by proceeding to take me into custody , with a right of patronage that left all his former criminality far behind .
“ two or three months at most .
without mentioning any names or going into any details , i gave him to understand that if he was aware of anybody tom , jack , or richard being about the chambers , or about the immediate neighbourhood , he had better get tom , jack , or richard out of the way while you were out of the way .
” said wemmick .
if you’re not tired , mr pip though i know it’s tiring to strangers will you tip him one more ?
“ now , i ask you , you blundering booby , ” said my guardian , very sternly , “ once more and for the last time , what the man you have brought here is prepared to swear ?
” or , supposing my own to be four times as much , i would leave a margin , and put them down at seven hundred .
mr pocket being justly celebrated for giving most excellent practical advice , and for having a clear and sound perception of things and a highly judicious mind , i had some notion in my heart-ache of begging him to accept my confidence .
this was very like his way of conducting that encounter in the garden ;
i had hold of joe’s hand now , and joe carried one of the torches .
“ for any while , ” cried herbert .
“ laws of the game !
under existing circumstances , there is no place like a great city when you are once in it .
that was made apparent by our avoidance of the subject , and by our agreeing without agreement to make my recovery of the use of my hands a question of so many hours , not of so many weeks .
i saw by his tilting of the bottle that there was no great quantity left in it .
my dream was out ;
it is blind devotion , unquestioning self-humiliation , utter submission , trust and belief against yourself and against the whole world , giving up your whole heart and soul to the smiter as i did !
although i had sent mr jaggers a brief account of the accident as soon as i had arrived in town , yet i had to give him all the details now ;
mr havisham was very rich and very proud .
drummle and i then sat snorting at one another for an hour , while the grove engaged in indiscriminate contradiction , and finally the promotion of good feeling was declared to have gone ahead at an amazing rate .
i had stopped to look at the house as i passed ;
“ no , ” said i , answering almost mechanically , in spite of my utmost efforts ;
the waiter seemed convinced that i could not deny it , and that it gave the case a black look .
not stumbling on the means after all , i was fain to go out to the adjacent lodge and get the watchman there to come with his lantern .
but this is the up-and-down-and-straight on it , pip , and i hope you’ll overlook shortcomings .
” demanded mr pocket .
for these mysterious words gave me a chill .
i was at a loss to account for this surprising circumstance , and could not help giving my mind to speculations about it , until by and by millers came down with the baby , which baby was handed to flopson , which flopson was handing it to mrs pocket , when she too went fairly head foremost over mrs pocket , baby and all , and was caught by herbert and myself .
if i had taken a hackney-chariot and gone by the streets , i should have missed my aim ;
“ mr pip ?
and she murmured , as she plaintively contemplated miss havisham , “ poor dear soul !
” he answered , slouching out .
her half-brother had now ample means again , but what with debts and what with new madness wasted them most fearfully again .
“ you know i was obliged , ” said camilla , “ i was obliged to be firm .
not so for a moment , knowing him as i did .
“ what do you want ?
this was all the preparation i received for that visit , or for others like it ;
as if they were expressing some mistrust of me .
“ it is the strangest thing , ” said mr wopsle , drifting into his lost look again ;
it was scarcely visible until one had got accustomed to the gloom , but there was a cut-up plum cake upon it , and there were cut-up oranges , and sandwiches , and biscuits , and two decanters that i knew very well as ornaments , but had never seen used in all my life ;
she seemed a little surprised that i should know it , but again replied , “ quite true .
“ when i offered to your sister to keep company , and to be asked in church at such times as she was willing and ready to come to the forge , i said to her , and bring the poor little child .
don’t break cover too soon .
there was a bookcase in the room ;
his back was towards me , and he had his arms folded , and was nodding forward , heavy with sleep .
it had happened some three or four years then , he said , and you brought into his mind the little girl so tragically lost , who would have been about your age .
“ how do you mean ?
it was midnight before i took him round to essex street , and saw him safely in at his own dark door .
i only saw in him a much better man than i had been to joe .
” he went on , handing me the bread and butter .
i heard it .
and as i felt that it came quicker , and as i felt that he saw that it came quicker , i felt that i had less chance than ever of getting anything out of him .
he accepted the invitation .
and something so gentle in her , so much needing protection on mill pond bank , by chinks’s basin , and the old green copper rope-walk , with old barley growling in the beam , that i would not have undone the engagement between her and herbert for all the money in the pocket-book i had never opened .
i says to myself , if i ain’t a gentleman , nor yet ain’t got no learning , i’m the owner of such .
“ if i give you the money for this purpose , will you keep my secret as you have kept your own ?
“ dear old pip , old chap , you’re a’most come round , sir .
“ there is always plenty , herbert , ” said i , to say something encouraging .
and how i sped in it is all i have left to tell .
“ invest portable property in a friend ?
“ don’t be cheeky , jack , ” remonstrated the landlord , in a melancholy and pathetic way .
he was stopped in his running on and in his shaking hands with me , by seeing provis .
he emptied his glass , got up , and stood at the side of the fire , with his heavy brown hand on the mantel-shelf .
an’t us , pip ?
not but what , pip , if you had ever made objections to the business , such as its being open to black and sut , or such-like , not but what they would have been attended to , don’t you see ?
“ two things i can tell you , ” said estella .
“ mind !
was there ever such a fate !
she looked at sarah pocket with triumph in her weird eyes , and so i left my fairy godmother , with both her hands on her crutch stick , standing in the midst of the dimly lighted room beside the rotten bride-cake that was hidden in cobwebs .
such is life !
her shoes were white .
“ i little thought , ” said estella , “ that i should take leave of you in taking leave of this spot .
and slimy stakes stuck out of the mud , and slimy stones stuck out of the mud , and red landmarks and tidemarks stuck out of the mud , and an old landing-stage and an old roofless building slipped into the mud , and all about us was stagnation and mud .
now , i’ll try you again .
“ then you may rely upon it , ” said herbert , “ that there would be great danger of his doing it .
i’ll speak in half a minute .
unless i can lead a very different sort of life from the life i lead now .
“ we want to know something about that man and about you .
i sank back on my pillow after drinking , and the face that looked so hopefully and tenderly upon me was the face of joe .
” to which i replied , after a long interval of reflection , “ i don’t know .
“ no , ” said i , “ that’s not it .
when herbert had been down to hammersmith and seen his father , he came back to me at our chambers , and devoted the day to attending on me .
when i got up to my little room and said my prayers , i did not forget joe’s recommendation , and yet my young mind was in that disturbed and unthankful state , that i thought long after i laid me down , how common estella would consider joe , a mere blacksmith ;
“ something that i would like done very much .
had i given joe no reason to doubt my constancy , and to think that in prosperity i should grow cold to him and cast him off ?
i thought it would be very good for me if i could get her out of my head , with all the rest of those remembrances and fancies , and could go to work determined to relish what i had to do , and stick to it , and make the best of it .
but if you could oblige me , i should take it as a kindness .
it is a most miserable thing to feel ashamed of home .
you won’t answer the question , yes or no ?
he regarded me with a look of affection that made him almost abhorrent to me again , though i had felt great pity for him .
i did not expect to see this in you .
“ you may , ” said he , “ and i may decline to answer it .
“ it came through provis , ” i replied .
i had thought a prayer , and had been with joe and biddy and herbert , before he turned towards me again .
” “ and four ?
and he was so very free of the wine that he even called for the other bottle , and handed that about with the same liberality , when the first was gone .
don’t try on useless measures .
he would always creep in-shore like some uncomfortable amphibious creature , even when the tide would have sent him fast upon his way ;
“ come and fight , ” said the pale young gentleman .
getting considerably worried and scratched by every letter .
this was so much her normal state , that joe and i would often , for weeks together , be , as to our fingers , like monumental crusaders as to their legs .
“ i do look at you , my dear boy .
it was fortunate for me that i had to take precautions to ensure (so far as i could) the safety of my dreaded visitor ;
” for example ;
the candle , however , had been blown out .
“ for , ” says herbert to me , coming home to dinner on one of those special occasions , “ i find the truth to be , handel , that an opening won’t come to one , but one must go to it , so i have been .
” said my sister , in her snappish way .
” “ not remember that you made me cry ?
“ i am instructed to communicate to him , ” said mr jaggers , throwing his finger at me sideways , “ that he will come into a handsome property .
as we were thus conversing in a low tone while old barley’s sustained growl vibrated in the beam that crossed the ceiling , the room door opened , and a very pretty , slight , dark-eyed girl of twenty or so came in with a basket in her hand :
“ halloa , pip !
finally , i remember that when i got into my little bedroom , i was truly wretched , and had a strong conviction on me that i should never like joe’s trade .
” said the girl ;
my lavish habits led his easy nature into expenses that he could not afford , corrupted the simplicity of his life , and disturbed his peace with anxieties and regrets .
at last i came within sight of the house , and saw that trabb and co .
young as i was , i believe that i dated a new admiration of joe from that night .
on a certain occasion when the finches were assembled in force , and when good feeling was being promoted in the usual manner by nobody’s agreeing with anybody else , the presiding finch called the grove to order , forasmuch as mr drummle had not yet toasted a lady ;
leaving me much more astonished than delighted by the virtues of that same indefinite “ it .
“ molly , let them see your wrist .
“ i did ask something of miss havisham , however , sir .
my sister made a dive at me , and fished me up by the hair , saying nothing more than the awful words , “ you come along and be dosed .
“ i think i should like to go home .
and his punishment was light .
what have i done !
he lay on his back , breathing with great difficulty .
this i would not hear of , so he took the top , and i faced him .
look over it .
we were at newgate in a few minutes , and we passed through the lodge where some fetters were hanging up on the bare walls among the prison rules , into the interior of the jail .
“ not to mention your calling me mr pip , which appears to me to be in bad taste , biddy , what do you mean ?
“ these are two celebrated ones .
i say , mr pip !
she looked full at me when i said this , and replied , “ go on .
“ i remember it all very well .
he swallowed , or rather snapped up , every mouthful , too soon and too fast ;
deuce a bit of a lady in the case , mr pip , except one , and she wasn’t of this slender lady-like sort , and you wouldn’t have caught her looking after this urn , unless there was something to drink in it .
and they’re property .
“ no , ” said i , “ certainly not .
” asked estella .
there was no discrepancy of years between us to remove her far from me ;
“ the time wi’ compeyson was a’most as hard a time as ever i had ;
but we had looked forward to my one-and-twentieth birthday , with a crowd of speculations and anticipations , for we had both considered that my guardian could hardly help saying something definite on that occasion .
we arrived there at two or three o’clock in the afternoon , and had very little way to walk to mr pocket’s house .
now tell me .
“ with me ?
perhaps i might have told joe about the pale young gentleman , if i had not previously been betrayed into those enormous inventions to which i had confessed .
there was no boat off the point , nor any boat drawn up anywhere near it , nor were there any signs of the men having embarked there .
“ mrs joe has been out a dozen times , looking for you , pip .
and then i took leave of her , and touched her and left her .
you call me a lucky fellow .
i have an impression that they were to be contributed eventually towards the liquidation of the national debt , but i know i had no hope of any personal participation in the treasure .
“ which you meantersay , pip , how long have your illness lasted , dear old chap ?
look over it , dear boy .
he had spoken his last words .
on this last evening , i dressed myself out in my new clothes for their delight , and sat in my splendour until bedtime .
shakspeare never was complimented with a finer pair .
my patroness , too , might hear of him , and not approve .
i could not reply at the moment , for my voice failed me .
“ for , i really am not , ” he added , with his son’s smile , “ an alarming personage .
“ which time ?
” repeated mr wopsle , eyeing it , much at a loss .
it occurred to me then , and as i afterwards found to herbert also , that he might be best got away across the water , on that pretence , as , to make purchases , or the like .
but happening to look up at mrs pocket as she sat reading her book of dignities after prescribing bed as a sovereign remedy for baby , i thought well no , i wouldn’t .
but indeed i am quite unable .
“ good god !
come .
chapter xlix .
“ he has the same look .
for , says the counsellor for compeyson , my lord and gentlemen , here you has afore you , side by side , two persons as your eyes can separate wide ;
we all looked awkwardly at the tablecloth while this was going on .
at about the same time , the eyes on the wall acquired a new expression , and in every one of those staring rounds i saw written , don’t go home .
“ yes , ” said i .
and if i had turned myself upside down before drinking , the wine could not have gone more direct to my head .
next day i set myself to get the boat .
she spared me the trouble of considering , by dismissing me .
i entertain a conviction , based upon large experience , that if in the days of my prosperity i had gone to the north pole , i should have met somebody there , wandering esquimaux or civilized man , who would have told me that pumblechook was my earliest patron and the founder of my fortunes .
the distance is ten miles .
and while the messenger was gone , i remarked this jew , who was of a highly excitable temperament , performing a jig of anxiety under a lamp-post and accompanying himself , in a kind of frenzy , with the words , “ o jaggerth , jaggerth , jaggerth !
i asked for cooling drink , and the dear hand that gave it me was joe’s .
“ given to government , joe ?
well , supposing mr pip is one of them ?
i’d ha’ been glad to pison the beer myself , ” said the jack , “ or put some rattling physic in it .
i considered , and said , “ never .
it’s altogether out of all your beats , and is well away from the usual heap of streets great and small .
” which he was , as a finch .
” he said , “ pip , old chap , you knowed her when she were a fine figure of a ” and clasped my hand and said no more .
“ i am afraid that must be admitted , ” said herbert ;
the officer always gave me the assurance that he was worse , and some other sick prisoners in the room , and some other prisoners who attended on them as sick nurses , (malefactors , but not incapable of kindness , god be thanked !) always joined in the same report .
i make a great difference between you and all other people when i say so much .
wemmick nodded .
“ i must be put somewheres , dear boy .
while mr pocket was the object of a queer sort of forgiving reproach , because he had never got one .
“ as i keep the cash , ” mr wemmick observed , “ we shall most likely meet pretty often .
have you dined with mr jaggers yet ?
he conducted us to gerrard street , soho , to a house on the south side of that street .
say five miles .
would you ?
i tell you so .
with a thump and a sound old clem !
this way for the runaway convicts !
under the weight of my wicked secret , i pondered whether the church would be powerful enough to shield me from the vengeance of the terrible young man , if i divulged to that establishment .
i cannot conceive why everybody of his standing who visited at our house should always have put me through the same inflammatory process under similar circumstances .
“ which some individual , ” joe politely hinted , “ mentioned she .
but her hands were estella’s hands , and her eyes were estella’s eyes , and if she had reappeared a hundred times i could have been neither more sure nor less sure that my conviction was the truth .
my self-approval when i ticked an entry was quite a luxurious sensation .
with all the novelty of my emancipation on me , i went to church with joe , and thought perhaps the clergyman wouldn’t have read that about the rich man and the kingdom of heaven , if he had known all .
“ yes , ” said a voice from the darkness beneath .
“ there’s no more to be got where that came from .
“ warning not to be attracted by you , do you mean , estella ?
“ i did .
and i nodded at the aged with a good intention whenever i failed to do it drowsily .
let me look at you .
the sheriffs with their great chains and nosegays , other civic gewgaws and monsters , criers , ushers , a great gallery full of people , a large theatrical audience , looked on , as the two-and-thirty and the judge were solemnly confronted .
“ yes , ” said i .
“ you are growing tall , pip !
when we had come out again , and had got rid of the boys who had been put into great spirits by the expectation of seeing me publicly tortured , and who were much disappointed to find that my friends were merely rallying round me , we went back to pumblechook’s .
“ as to pip , he’s going up town , ” said joe .
as to the where and how of living , dear boy , give me your own opinions on it .
he was poor enough , but not time-serving or jealous .
when we got back again , and he lifted me out , and carried me so easily !
but bearing in mind that them were which i meantersay of a stunning and outdacious sort , alluding to them which bordered on weal-cutlets and dog-fighting , a sincere well-wisher would adwise , pip , their being dropped into your meditations , when you go upstairs to bed .
i said , “ indeed ?
“ how did he get ’em ?
let them not hope to taste it !
i reposed complete confidence in no one but biddy ;
“ yes , miss havisham .
in the mean time , herbert and i were to consider separately what it would be best to say ;
i’m wrong out of the forge , the kitchen , or off th’ meshes .
so i drew away from the window , and sat down in my one chair by the bedside , feeling it very sorrowful and strange that this first night of my bright fortunes should be the loneliest i had ever known .
he spoke in a slushy voice , as if much mud had washed into his throat .
it was not that i knew i could never bear to speak to him about her , that i knew i could never bear to hear him creak his boots at her , that i knew i could never bear to see him wash his hands of her ;
at last , the old woman and the niece came in , the latter with a head not easily distinguishable from her dusty broom , and testified surprise at sight of me and the fire .
so , sir , ” said wemmick , smiling again , but seriously too , as he shook his head , “ if you can suppose the little place besieged , it would hold out a devil of a time in point of provisions .
on his asking me if i was satisfied with the ground , and on my replying yes , he begged my leave to absent himself for a moment , and quickly returned with a bottle of water and a sponge dipped in vinegar .
there were days once , i know , that i did for a while forget ;
this is my purse , and you are to pay my charges out of it .
as she applied herself to set the tea-things , joe peeped down at me over his leg , as if he were mentally casting me and himself up , and calculating what kind of pair we practically should make , under the grievous circumstances foreshadowed .
“ now , joseph gargery , i warn you this is your last chance .
do you comprehend the imaginary case ?
“ a score or so of years ago , that woman was tried at the old bailey for murder , and was acquitted .
however , as he thought his court-suit necessary to the occasion , it was not for me to tell him that he looked far better in his working-dress ;
yet in the london streets so crowded with people and so brilliantly lighted in the dusk of evening , there were depressing hints of reproaches for that i had put the poor old kitchen at home so far away ;
they both execrated the place in very strong language , and gradually growled themselves out , and had nothing left to say .
from that room , too , the daylight was completely excluded , and it had an airless smell that was oppressive .
“ yet , ” said mr pumblechook , leading the company gently back to the theme from which they had strayed , “ pork regarded as biled is rich , too ;
nor yet anywheres else but what is private , and beknown , and understood among friends .
early in the morning i was out , and looking in , unseen , at one of the wooden windows of the forge .
murder him ?
notwithstanding my inability to settle to anything , which i hope arose out of the restless and incomplete tenure on which i held my means , i had a taste for reading , and read regularly so many hours a day .
saving his troublesome sense of having been “ low ” on one occasion since his return , on which point he began to hold forth to herbert , the moment my revelation was finished , he had no perception of the possibility of my finding any fault with my good fortune .
indeed , i was not only so changed in the course of nature , but so differently dressed and so differently circumstanced , that it was not at all likely he could have known me without accidental help .
he smoked his pipe as we went along , and sometimes stopped to clap me on the shoulder .
“ will soon what ?
“ and so do i , ” i added , with a scarlet face .
there joe cut himself short , and informed me that i was to be talked to in great moderation , and that i was to take a little nourishment at stated frequent times , whether i felt inclined for it or not , and that i was to submit myself to all his orders .
“ i wouldn’t lend one of you a sixpence .
the late stress upon me had enabled me to put off illness , but not to put it away ;
i had neither the good sense nor the good feeling to know that this was all my fault , and that if i had been easier with joe , joe would have been easier with me .
was afflicted with such remarkable coughs ;
call estella .
there’s been overmuch coming back of late years , and i should of a certainty be hanged if took .
but read the rest , jo .
at this dismal time we were evidently all possessed by the idea that we were followed .
stop him !
who was also in the first bloom of youth , and not quite decided whether to mount to the woolsack , or to roof himself in with a mitre .
“ of late , very often .
i don’t know what he had looked like , except a funeral ;
perhaps we had better go to your place of residence .
there are many kinds of pride , ” said biddy , looking full at me and shaking her head ;
i looked about me , but there appeared to be now no possible escape from the inquiry , “ have-i anything to receive , sir ?
he answered with one other nod .
he ate in a ravenous way that was very disagreeable , and all his actions were uncouth , noisy , and greedy .
“ might i ask her age then ?
i stopped then , to wave my hat , and dear old joe waved his strong right arm above his head , crying huskily “ hooroar !
“ and miss estella that’s her niece , i think handed her in cake and wine at the coach-window , on a gold plate .
the few who were passing passed on their several ways , and the street was empty when i turned back into the temple .
his boast that he had made me a gentleman , and that he had come to see me support the character on his ample resources , was made for me quite as much as for himself .
home had never been a very pleasant place to me , because of my sister’s temper .
then , with a sudden hurry of violence and swearing horribly , he threw the bottle from him , and stooped ;
wemmick leaned back in his chair , staring at me , with his hands in the pockets of his trousers , and his pen put horizontally into the post .
“ and it’s no more than your merits (as i said when my opinion was asked) , and i wish you joy of the money !
“ there’s not much bad blood about .
” said joe , drawing his shoeing-stool near the forge .
“ were you wondering , as you walked along , how it came to be left in this condition ?
it was like striking out a horseshoe complete , in a single blow .
i was always in debt to him , always under his thumb , always a working , always a getting into danger .
“ i judged the person to be with him , ” returned the watchman .
“ then tell us .
all the uses and scents of the brewery might have evaporated with its last reek of smoke .
the lady whom i had never seen before , lifted up her eyes and looked archly at me , and then i saw that the eyes were estella’s eyes .
“ and wishing , ” pursued joe , with another fixed look at me , like another effort of remembrance , “ that the state of miss havisham’s elth were sitch as would have allowed , were it , pip ?
“ i didn’t go to do it , mr wemmick .
what next !
as i crossed by the fountain , i saw his lighted back windows looking bright and quiet , and , when i stood for a few moments in the doorway of the building where i lived , before going up the stairs , garden court was as still and lifeless as the staircase was when i ascended it .
i was obliged to admit that i did know it for a certainty , and i said to myself , “ pip , what a fool you are !
“ nor is this your trading-place , ” said i .
then he put the candle away from him on the table , so that he could see me , and sat with his arms folded on the table and looked at me .
the aged must have been stirring with the lark , for , glancing into the perspective of his bedroom , i observed that his bed was empty .
when or where that intention may be carried out , i cannot say ;
i should not have minded that , if they would only have left me alone .
“ how much ?
“ what do you mean ?
when you say you love me , i know what you mean , as a form of words ;
among the wretched creatures before him whom he must single out for special address was one who almost from his infancy had been an offender against the laws ;
don’t let her lift me up to get it round me .
where i might go , what i might do , or when i might return , were questions utterly unknown to me ;
he’ll have no more on you .
surely , i had seen exactly such eyes and such hands on a memorable occasion very lately !
“ this watching of me at my chambers (which i have once had reason to suspect) , ” i said to wemmick when he came back , “ is inseparable from the person to whom you have adverted ;
“ it is so delightful to hear you , joe !
” said i .
“ now , ” said he , when we had surveyed one another for some time , “ i’ve got you .
“ joe , ” said i ;
after looking at the twilight without , for a little while , she went on to say :
he replied that it would give him much pleasure , and that he would expect me at the office at six o’clock .
the lady with whom estella was placed , mrs brandley by name , was a widow , with one daughter several years older than estella .
“ but it makes no difference to you , you know , ” said biddy , calmly .
“ clara and i have talked about it again and again , ” herbert pursued , “ and the dear little thing begged me only this evening , with tears in her eyes , to say to you that , if you will live with us when we come together , she will do her best to make you happy , and to convince her husband’s friend that he is her friend too .
a childish association revived with wonderful force in the moment of the slight action , and i fancied that i saw miss havisham hanging to the beam .
after a silence during which i had hesitated as to the politeness of making the remark .
bless you , it were only necessary to get it well round in a man’s mind , to be certain on it .
once received , it is a haunting idea ;
i got your letter and destroyed it .
don’t cut my throat , sir , ” i pleaded in terror .
it was a slip of mine .
“ thankee , sir , ” returned joe , evidently dispirited by the proposal , “ since you are so kind as make chice of coffee , i will not run contrairy to your own opinions .
“ and will the other gentleman originate a sentiment .
“ what spirit was that ?
this was first put into my head by his seeing a shoot that had come up in the night , and saying , “ what , captain tom ?
it was easy for me to find out , and i did soon find out , that drummle had begun to follow her closely , and that she allowed him to do it .
herbert pocket had a frank and easy way with him that was very taking .
ha , ha , ha !
but it was not to be done .
“ murder .
i had not looked for him .
i shall be down soon and often .
so , i walked a little further with biddy , looking silently at her downcast eyes .
ever forgiving and ever affable .
mr wopsle answered , “ those are not the exact words .
“ bad taste , ” said herbert , laughing , “ but a fact .
but what would you have ?
now and then , the sound of the signal cannon broke upon us again , and again rolled sulkily along the course of the river .
mr pumblechook’s premises in the high street of the market town , were of a peppercorny and farinaceous character , as the premises of a cornchandler and seedsman should be .
i unlocked and unbolted that door , and got a file from among joe’s tools .
the little servant happening to be entering the fortress with two hot rolls , i passed through the postern and crossed the drawbridge in her company , and so came without announcement into the presence of wemmick as he was making tea for himself and the aged .
“ are you , joe ?
i must talk in my own way .
mr pumblechook wore corduroys , and so did his shopman ;
and some ballast-lighters , shaped like a child’s first rude imitation of a boat , lay low in the mud ;
i warn’t locked up as often now as formerly , but i wore out my good share of key-metal still .
i don’t suffer those who were here just now , or any one to speak of it .
“ avail yourself of this evening to lay hold of his portable property .
this lady , whose name was camilla , very much reminded me of my sister , with the difference that she was older , and (as i found when i caught sight of her) of a blunter cast of features .
“ well !
“ and all that i know , ” i retorted , “ you know .
it was then i began to understand that everything in the room had stopped , like the watch and the clock , a long time ago .
“ do you know him ?
and , as i looked along the yellow expanse out of which i remember its seeming to grow , like a black fungus , i saw speckle-legged spiders with blotchy bodies running home to it , and running out from it , as if some circumstances of the greatest public importance had just transpired in the spider community .
” said wemmick .
they allowed a very liberal table to mr and mrs pocket , yet it always appeared to me that by far the best part of the house to have boarded in would have been the kitchen , always supposing the boarder capable of self-defence , for , before i had been there a week , a neighbouring lady with whom the family were personally unacquainted , wrote in to say that she had seen millers slapping the baby .
who else is there to inform ?
but , it was bound too tight for that .
“ your sister is a fine figure of a woman .
“ blacksmith , eh ?
you will have no objection , i dare say , to your great expectations being encumbered with that easy condition .
i could feel the muscles of the thin arm round my neck swell with the vehemence that possessed her .
“ have you ever seen a messenger you once sent to me , ” i inquired , “ since he undertook that trust ?
he says you will understand .
because it is decidedly the case with us .
i recalled , too , that the one-eyed gentleman had shuffled forth against the wall when i was the innocent cause of his being turned out .
mithter jaggerth !
little , if any , community of feeling subsisted between them and estella , but the understanding was established that they were necessary to her , and that she was necessary to them .
but , it had not quite melted from the cold shadow of this bit of garden , and the wind caught it up in little eddies and threw it at the window , as if it pelted me for coming there .
” said i , almost in a frenzy of fear and dislike , “ i want to speak to you .
in the same instant i heard responsive shouts , saw figures and a gleam of light dash in at the door , heard voices and tumult , and saw orlick emerge from a struggle of men , as if it were tumbling water , clear the table at a leap , and fly out into the night .
i then rejoined mr wemmick , and affecting to consult my watch , and to be surprised by the information i had received , accepted his offer .
“ and you get me wittles .
so we all put our pocket-handkerchiefs to our faces , as if our noses were bleeding , and filed out two and two ;
mr jaggers’s eyes retired a little deeper into his head when i handed him the tablets , but he presently handed them over to wemmick , with instructions to draw the check for his signature .
“ we have had a time together , joe , that i can never forget .
“ will it ?
he said it was not worth while , i was so near my destination ;
“ well , ” he returned , drawing a long breath , “ i hope so .
if i had been attracted to him by the strongest admiration and affection , instead of shrinking from him with the strongest repugnance ;
after another silent turn in the garden , i fell back on the main position .
my father is miss havisham’s cousin ;
we had a quiet day on the sunday , and we rode out into the country , and then walked in the fields .
and yours will be there !
“ very tall and dark , ” i told him .
i had believed in the kitchen as a chaste though not magnificent apartment ;
while mrs joe sat with her head bending over her needlework , i put my mouth into the forms of saying to joe , “ what’s a convict ?
i mistrusted a design to entrap me into some admission .
“ you must marry .
“ certainly you know it .
at last , when the night was slow to creep on towards two o’clock , i felt that i absolutely could no longer bear the place as a place to lie down in , and that i must get up .
i had not seen him alone since the disastrous issue of the attempted flight ;
the development of whose inclination to gird in a grudging and suspicious way at the rest , was screwed out of him before the fish was taken off .
“ none but a runaway convict now and then .
i walked past the fountain twice or thrice before i descended the steps that were between me and my rooms , but i was quite alone .
at our own door , i found little jane pocket coming home from a little party escorted by her little lover ;
“ did she ?
the punch being very nice , we sat there drinking it and talking , until it was almost nine o’clock .
though every vestige of her dress was burnt , as they told me , she still had something of her old ghastly bridal appearance ;
when we stood in the daylight alone again , joe backed up against a wall , and said to me , “ astonishing !
“ but wait a bit .
“ well !
for , i had by that time come to myself so far as to consider that i could not go back to the inn and see drummle there ;
i brought it out , and laid it ready for him , and my blood again ran cold when he again took me by both hands to give me good-night .
miss havisham gives you to him , as the greatest slight and injury that could be done to the many far better men who admire you , and to the few who truly love you .
“ i dare say , ” i went on , meaning to be very severe , “ that you wouldn’t lend money to any of us if we wanted it .
as i walked on to the hotel , i felt that a dread , much exceeding the mere apprehension of a painful or disagreeable recognition , made me tremble .
my poor handel , i hurt you !
but , i said to herbert that , before i could go abroad , i must see both estella and miss havisham .
take him , and i can bear it better , for your sake !
nothing had been taken away from any part of the house .
looking out of the towel , he caught my eye .
the messenger that brought it , said would you be so good as read it by my lantern ?
as to the convicts , they went their way with the coach , and i knew at what point they would be spirited off to the river .
no gleam of fire , no glittering shower of sparks , no roar of bellows ;
he took my chin in his large hand and turned up my face to have a look at me by the light of the candle .
“ pray what is your business ?
“ don’t you think i ought to make miss havisham a visit ?
she said them slightingly , but not with displeasure .
miss havisham had sent for me , to see if she could take a fancy to me .
turning from the temple gate as soon as i had read the warning , i made the best of my way to fleet street , and there got a late hackney chariot and drove to the hummums in covent garden .
he practised on her affection in that systematic way , that he got great sums of money from her , and he induced her to buy her brother out of a share in the brewery (which had been weakly left him by his father) at an immense price , on the plea that when he was her husband he must hold and manage it all .
“ but you never will , you see , ” said biddy .
from this slight occasion sprang two meetings that i have now to tell of .
joe was a fair man , with curls of flaxen hair on each side of his smooth face , and with eyes of such a very undecided blue that they seemed to have somehow got mixed with their own whites .
i was alone , and had a dull sense of being alone .
it struck me that wemmick walked among the prisoners much as a gardener might walk among his plants .
in an arm-chair , with an elbow resting on the table and her head leaning on that hand , sat the strangest lady i have ever seen , or shall ever see .
either orlick , or the strange man who had shown me the file .
“ no objection .
when i had shown this to herbert and had put it in the fire but not before we had both got it by heart we considered what to do .
but mrs pocket was at home , and was in a little difficulty , on account of the baby’s having been accommodated with a needle-case to keep him quiet during the unaccountable absence (with a relative in the foot guards) of millers .
there were four little girls , and two little boys , besides the baby who might have been either , and the baby’s next successor who was as yet neither .
i don’t know about bad blood , ” returned mr wemmick ;
he sees the soldiers , with their red coats lighted up by the torches carried afore , closing in round him .
i had been doing this , in an excess of attention to his recital .
you won’t find half so much fault in me if you think of me in my forge dress , with my hammer in my hand , or even my pipe .
old orlick bullied and beat , eh ?
and now , when they were all in lively anticipation of “ the two villains ” being taken , and when the bellows seemed to roar for the fugitives , the fire to flare for them , the smoke to hurry away in pursuit of them , joe to hammer and clink for them , and all the murky shadows on the wall to shake at them in menace as the blaze rose and sank , and the red-hot sparks dropped and died , the pale afternoon outside almost seemed in my pitying young fancy to have turned pale on their account , poor wretches .
he would sit and talk to me in the old confidence , and with the old simplicity , and in the old unassertive protecting way , so that i would half believe that all my life since the days of the old kitchen was one of the mental troubles of the fever that was gone .
windy donkey as he was , it really amazed me that he could have the face to talk thus to mine .
that’s what’s wanted .
so , they plied their oars once more , and i looked out for anything like a house .
“ william , ” said mr pumblechook to the waiter , “ put a muffin on table .
while he was putting up the other cast and coming down from the chair , the thought crossed my mind that all his personal jewelry was derived from like sources .
what’s-his-named .
having the reason that i had for being suspicious , i even suspected this poor actor .
there was a song joe used to hum fragments of at the forge , of which the burden was old clem .
without distinctly knowing whether i should have been more sorry for mr wopsle if he had been in despair , i was so sorry for him as it was , that i took the opportunity of his turning round to have his braces put on , which jostled us out at the doorway , to ask herbert what he thought of having him home to supper ?
which was announced to all present by a prodigious concussion .
“ and you feel convinced that you must break with him ?
as he now appeared in his doorway , towelling his hands , wemmick got on his great-coat and stood by to snuff out the candles .
“ nor i neither , ” said biddy .
how long have i been here ?
i thought mr jaggers glanced at joe , as if he considered him a fool for his disinterestedness .
but i know very well that it took until half-past nine o’ clock that night , and that when mr wopsle got into newgate , i thought he never would go to the scaffold , he became so much slower than at any former period of his disgraceful career .
a ghostly pirate calling out to me through a speaking-trumpet , as i passed the gibbet-station , that i had better come ashore and be hanged there at once , and not put it off .
she answered so carelessly , that i said , “ you speak of yourself as if you were some one else .
when we went downstairs again , wemmick led me into my guardian’s room , and said , “ this you’ve seen already .
he was about to take another bite , and had just got his head on one side for a good purchase on it , when his eye fell on me , and he saw that my bread and butter was gone .
why repeat it a thousand times ?
that was a memorable day to me , for it made great changes in me .
much as the aged is one person , and mr jaggers is another .
some defiant , some stricken with terror , some sobbing and weeping , some covering their faces , some staring gloomily about .
go and sit down this instant !
“ they dread him so much ?
to the bottom , to the bottom .
i tried to keep my hand steady while i did so , but his look at me as he leaned back in his chair with the long draggled end of his neckerchief between his teeth evidently forgotten made my hand very difficult to master .
“ you did come home , then ?
” said my convict , with fierce energy .
“ nothing .
so suddenly and smartly did he do this , that we all stopped in our foolish contention .
you don’t know what may happen to him .
” said i .
but don’t catch hold of me .
my terror , as i lay there , of falling ill , and being unfitted for to-morrow , was so besetting , that i wonder it did not disable me of itself .
but , i saw nothing that in the least explained him .
“ i’ll show you a wrist , ” repeated mr jaggers , with an immovable determination to show it .
my first most vivid and broad impression of the identity of things seems to me to have been gained on a memorable raw afternoon towards evening .
“ that’s true , mum , ” said mr pumblechook , with a grave nod .
“ what for , joe ?
and i entreat you to say a word for me to mr jaggers , and to represent to him that , all circumstances considered , he ought to be more open with me !
if you had done this , and then , for a purpose , had wanted her to take naturally to the daylight and she could not do it , you would have been disappointed and angry ?
i have a heart to be stabbed in or shot in , i have no doubt , ” said estella , “ and of course if it ceased to beat i should cease to be .
my sister with an exclamation of impatience was going to fly at me , i had no shadow of defence , for joe was busy in the forge , when mr pumblechook interposed with “ no !
he swore an oath at me , made a hit at me , it was a round weak blow that missed me and almost knocked himself down , for it made him stumble , and then he ran into the mist , stumbling twice as he went , and i lost him .
orlick , as if he had been of no more account than the pale young gentleman , was very soon among the coal-dust , and in no hurry to come out of it .
let it stand for this day week , and you shall receive my printed address in the meantime .
i have so settled down in their home , that it’s not at all likely .
” said the off-hand sergeant , “ as it’s on his majesty’s service .
upon my soul , i half believe he escaped in his terror , to get quit of me , not knowing it was me as had got ashore .
“ are they any wiser ?
who’s him ?
but if the often repeated word had been hate instead of love despair revenge dire death it could not have sounded from her lips more like a curse .
she was at his elbow when he addressed her , putting a dish upon the table .
as we approached the point , i begged him to remain in a sheltered place , while i went on to reconnoitre ;
however , this is not london talk .
and when sarah pocket , miss georgiana , and mistress camilla were not my friends , i think .
come !
“ not all of one kind , ” resumed biddy .
when she came to that , and to a wild cry that followed that , i caught her round the waist .
“ yes , old chap .
more composure came to me after a while , and we talked as we used to talk , lying on the grass at the old battery .
for the present , under the circumstances , we deemed it prudent to make rather light of the matter to trabb’s boy ;
there was a supper-tray after we got home at night , and i think we should all have enjoyed ourselves , but for a rather disagreeable domestic occurrence .
“ no .
by and by , i roused myself , and went to the play .
on the way home , if i had been in a humour for talking , the talk must have been all on my side , for mr wopsle parted from us at the door of the jolly bargemen , and joe went all the way home with his mouth wide open , to rinse the rum out with as much air as possible .
ain’t it awful to see her so mad ?’ next he cries , she’ll put it on me , and then i’m done for !
” by dint of straining that term out of myself several times and tapping the old gentleman on the chest to associate it with him , i at last succeeded in making my meaning understood .
“ my orders ends here , young master .
but you never turn to at it , biddy .
we shook hands , he was always a remarkably short shaker , and i thanked him .
o estella , estella !
i only wanted you to know that i am doing very well in my apprenticeship , and am always much obliged to you .
” he tilted me again .
mr pumblechook holding me all the while as if we had looked in on our way to the scaffold , to have those little preliminaries disposed of .
” cried my excitable acquaintance , turning white , “ don’t thay you’re again habraham latharuth !
“ i had a ridiculous fancy that he must be with you , mr pip , till i saw that you were quite unconscious of him , sitting behind you there like a ghost .
i clutched the leg of the table again immediately , and pressed it to my bosom as if it had been the companion of my youth and friend of my soul .
he has a watch and a chain and a ring and a breast-pin and a handsome suit of clothes .
i know her mother .
i should be an inconvenience at joe’s ;
drummle , an old-looking young man of a heavy order of architecture , was whistling .
and when i come away from him , you know that my thoughts are with him .
here , he skipped from his left leg on to his right .
if my advice had been asked , i should not have been here .
my sister’s bringing up had made me sensitive .
throughout , i had seemed to myself to attend more to the wind and the rain than to him ;
whether myrmidons of justice , especially sent down from london , would be lying in ambush behind the gate ;
good in you !
“ dear magwitch , i must tell you now , at last .
“ you don’t eat ’em , ” returned mr pumblechook , sighing and nodding his head several times , as if he might have expected that , and as if abstinence from watercresses were consistent with my downfall .
enough that i saw no gate then , and that i saw one now .
now , did you not think so ?
“ you know , pip , ” replied joe , “ as you and me were ever friends , and it were looked for’ard to betwixt us , as being calc’lated to lead to larks .
but come in , come in .
it was spacious , and i dare say had once been handsome , but every discernible thing in it was covered with dust and mould , and dropping to pieces .
” was the fierce retort .
“ i suppose you will be glad of variety and admiration ?
“ where will you put me ?
ah !
nor , did miss havisham’s manner towards estella in anywise change , except that i believed it to have something like fear infused among its former characteristics .
“ i took him .
mr pumblechook worked his head like a screw to screw it out of me , and said , “ is forty-three pence seven and sixpence three fardens , for instance ?
this again was heightened by a certain gypsy character that set the banquet off ;
i would tell him before breakfast .
” in a most irritating manner he instantly slapped his hands against one another , daintily flung one of his legs up behind him , pulled my hair , slapped his hands again , dipped his head , and butted it into my stomach .
he swallowed slowly , tilting up the bottle by little and little , and now he looked at me no more .
“ now , handel , i am quite free from the flavour of sour grapes , upon my soul and honour !
in these dialogues , my sister spoke to me as if she were morally wrenching one of my teeth out at every reference ;
“ what were you brought up to be ?
i am afraid it is scarcely necessary for my father’s son to remark that my father’s establishment is not particularly brilliant in its housekeeping .
and often before i had got them well together , they would be dispersed in all directions by one stray thought , that perhaps after all miss havisham was going to make my fortune when my time was out .
” said he , coming back .
they are the secrets i have mentioned .
” said he , facing round , “ what’s the matter ?
provis , who had been asleep too , staggered up at the noise i made , and in an instant i saw his jackknife shining in his hand .
as often as i was restless in the night , and that was every quarter of an hour , i reflected what an unkindness , what an injury , what an injustice , biddy had done me .
he thought , in black .
if only estella had come to be a spectator of our proceedings , i should have felt sufficiently discontented ;
secondly , yes !
i said in a miserable manner , “ yes .
but he would have much , ” said wemmick , cutting me short , “ and they know it .
her chin being attached to her diadem by a broad band of that metal (as if she had a gorgeous toothache) , her waist being encircled by another , and each of her arms by another , so that she was openly mentioned as “ the kettle-drum .
“ as we are going in the same direction , pip , we may walk together .
she would rather i did not travel alone , and objects to receiving my maid , for she has a sensitive horror of being talked of by such people .
“ my poor dear handel , ” he replied , holding his head , “ i am too stunned to think .
” said mr pumblechook conceitedly .
he was taken on board , and instantly manacled at the wrists and ankles .
but who else was there ?
so , the unfortunate mike very humbly withdrew , and mr jaggers and wemmick appeared to have re-established their good understanding , and went to work again with an air of refreshment upon them as if they had just had lunch .
it troubled me that there should have been a lurker on the stairs , on that night of all nights in the year , and i asked the watchman , on the chance of eliciting some hopeful explanation as i handed him a dram at the door , whether he had admitted at his gate any gentleman who had perceptibly been dining out ?
his men resumed their muskets and fell in .
not to make joe uneasy by talking too much , even if i had been able to talk much , i deferred asking him about miss havisham until next day .
molly , let them see your wrist .
where do you expect to go to ?
” said mrs pocket .
not with pleasure , though i was bound to him by so many ties ;
we are extra official .
joe held his knees and looked at me .
i’ve been carted here and carted there , and put out of this town , and put out of that town , and stuck in the stocks , and whipped and worried and drove .
and i felt absolutely certain that this woman was estella’s mother .
“ what do you want for them ?
and more needles were missing than it could be regarded as quite wholesome for a patient of such tender years either to apply externally or to take as a tonic .
i made some attempt to get up and dress myself .
i entered , therefore , and found myself in a pretty large room , well lighted with wax candles .
i saw her often at richmond , i heard of her often in town , and i used often to take her and the brandleys on the water ;
when i asked this officer’s permission to change the prisoner’s wet clothes by purchasing any spare garments i could get at the public-house , he gave it readily :
good-bye !
you have been in every line i have ever read since i first came here , the rough common boy whose poor heart you wounded even then .
” said he , sluicing his face , and speaking through the water-drops ;
the wretched man trifled with his glass , took it up , looked at it through the light , put it down , prolonged my misery .
sometimes , she would condescend to me ;
, and within four months i assumed my first undivided responsibility .
choking and boiling as i was , i felt that we could not go a word further , without introducing estella’s name , which i could not endure to hear him utter ;
can you see his signal ?
mr jaggers’s own high-backed chair was of deadly black horsehair , with rows of brass nails round it , like a coffin ;
likewise , it seems to me that , concentrating our attention on the examination , we altogether overlook one of the best points of the animal .
will you do me the favour to begin at once to call me by my christian name , herbert ?
i had taken care to have it well understood in little britain when my birthday was .
that will be his place , there , ” striking the table with her stick , “ at my head !
why i was trying to pack mine into my tumbler , i am wholly unable to say .
“ yes , sir , ” said i ;
” observed my sister ;
and indeed , i think we are all engaged , except the baby .
” with that , we returned to her room , and sat down as before ;
” and if anybody made an admission , he said , “ now i have got you !
sometimes , a strong man’s hand , sometimes a strong man’s breast , was set against my mouth to deaden my cries , and with a hot breath always close to me , i struggled ineffectually in the dark , while i was fastened tight to the wall .
what then , when that’s once done ?
“ here’s the cook lying insensibly drunk on the kitchen floor , with a large bundle of fresh butter made up in the cupboard ready to sell for grease !
often after dark , when i was pulling the bellows for joe , and we were singing old clem , and when the thought how we used to sing it at miss havisham’s would seem to show me estella’s face in the fire , with her pretty hair fluttering in the wind and her eyes scorning me , often at such a time i would look towards those panels of black night in the wall which the wooden windows then were , and would fancy that i saw her just drawing her face away , and would believe that she had come at last .
he had raked his fire low , put his hat and great-coat ready , and was beating himself all over the chest with his safe-key , as an athletic exercise after business .
you know , mr pip , ” pursued biddy , with a smile , as she raised her eyes to my face , “ the new schools are not like the old , but i learnt a good deal from you after that time , and have had time since then to improve .
i was beginning to express my gratitude to my benefactor for the great liberality with which i was treated , when mr jaggers stopped me .
the miserable man was a man of that confined stolidity of mind , that he could not discuss my prospects without having me before him , as it were , to operate upon , and he would drag me up from my stool (usually by the collar) where i was quiet in a corner , and , putting me before the fire as if i were going to be cooked , would begin by saying , “ now , mum , here is this boy !
“ well , ” said i , not desirous of more conversation , “ shall i go up to miss havisham ?
look at his face ;
one thing was manifest to both of us , and that was , that until relief came , neither of us could relinquish the fire .
and he had better play there , ” said my sister , shaking her head at me as an encouragement to be extremely light and sportive , “ or i’ll work him .
” cried my sister , beginning to scream .
what a doleful night !
i beg your pardon .
at least i can’t .
and that the more varnish you put on , the more the grain will express itself .
forasmuch as they hang in my memory by only this one slender thread , i don’t know what they did , except that they forbore to remove me .
the man could not be more particular as to the time at which he saw her (he got into dense confusion when he tried to be) , than that it must have been before nine .
did the woman keep her oath ?
as we returned towards the setting sun we had yesterday left behind us , and as the stream of our hopes seemed all running back , i told him how grieved i was to think that he had come home for my sake .
well deserved , well deserved !
“ my business ?
” mr pocket had invested the prince’s treasure in the ways of the world ever since , and it was supposed to have brought him in but indifferent interest .
biddy looked at me for an instant , and went on with her sewing .
you’re oncommon small .
and he looked sideways here and there while he ate , as if he thought there was danger in every direction of somebody’s coming to take the pie away .
“ pip’s rap , ” i heard her say , immediately ;
“ at the back , there’s a pig , and there are fowls and rabbits ;
“ i understand you .
i had asked him the question inhospitably enough , for i resented the sort of bright and gratified recognition that still shone in his face .
condemned to inaction and a state of constant restlessness and suspense , i rowed about in my boat , and waited , waited , waited , as i best could .
i only know that i found myself , with a perseverance worthy of a much better cause , making the most strenuous exertions to compress it within those limits .
“ my dear young friend , ” said mr pumblechook ;
“ but i did mind you , pip , ” he returned with tender simplicity .
day by day as his hopes grew stronger and his face brighter , he must have thought me a more and more affectionate friend , for i had the greatest difficulty in restraining my tears of triumph when i saw him so happy .
i had heard of her as leading a most unhappy life , and as being separated from her husband , who had used her with great cruelty , and who had become quite renowned as a compound of pride , avarice , brutality , and meanness .
it was in the fourth year of my apprenticeship to joe , and it was a saturday night .
“ what was fit company for you once , would be quite unfit company for you now .
biddy was mr wopsle’s great-aunt’s granddaughter ;
i saw in this , a reason for her being beforehand assigned to me .
he now retorted in a coarse , lumpish way , and startop tried to turn the discussion aside with some small pleasantry that made us all laugh .
he nodded when i said the subject was painful to me , clapped me on the back , put round the wine again , and went on with his dinner .
what do you mean by it ?
and he , coming up from the antipodes rather unsteadily , after an apparently violent journey , proved to be mr wopsle in a high-crowned hat , with a necromantic work in one volume under his arm .
she had a half-brother .
“ and must obey , ” said i .
on the broad landing between miss havisham’s own room and that other room in which the long table was laid out , i saw a garden-chair , a light chair on wheels , that you pushed from behind .
and we took gulps of milk and water , with apologetic countenances , from a jug on the dresser .
“ with pleasure , ” said he , “ though i venture to prophesy that you’ll want very few hints .
at that time it was customary to carry convicts down to the dock-yards by stage-coach .
“ the dear little thing , ” returned herbert , “ holds dutifully to her father as long as he lasts ;
i told her she was right , and i knew it was much to be regretted , but still it was not to be helped .
“ don’t mind me .
“ pip , ” said he , “ we won’t talk about poor dreams ;’ you know more about such things than i , having much fresher experience of that kind .
“ i were , ” said joe , with emphasis and solemnity .
when he come for to hear that hey ?
it was the slightest start that could escape a man , the most carefully repressed and the sooner checked , but he did start , though he made it a part of the action of taking out his pocket-handkerchief .
but i was no sooner in the passage than i extinguished my candle ;
“ but you said to me , ” returned estella , very earnestly , “ god bless you , god forgive you !’ and if you could say that to me then , you will not hesitate to say that to me now , now , when suffering has been stronger than all other teaching , and has taught me to understand what your heart used to be .
“ undoubtedly .
miss havisham continued to look steadily at me .
when i had spoken to biddy , as i thought it not a time for talking i went and sat down near joe , and there began to wonder in what part of the house it she my sister was .
we found a new set of people lingering outside , but wemmick made a way among them by saying coolly yet decisively , “ i tell you it’s no use ;
“ yes .
i reflected for some time , and then answered as if i had discovered a new idea , “ i mean pretty well .
rather musty , but barnard’s is musty .
i hope uncle pumblechook’s mare mayn’t have set a forefoot on a piece o’ ice , and gone down .
on my presenting myself at mrs brandley’s , estella’s maid was called to tell that estella had gone into the country .
“ my dear herbert , we are getting on badly .
“ she ain’t in that line , mum , ” said mr pumblechook .
all partook of pudding .
“ i mean , enjoying himself with his elders and betters , and improving himself with their conversation , and rolling in the lap of luxury .
i had tried hard at it , but had made nothing of it .
but he was ever ready to listen to me ;
i answered , “ pretty well , sir , ” and my sister shook her fist at me .
pondering , as i went along , on all i had seen , and deeply revolving that i was a common labouring-boy ;
it’s easier than bellowsing and hammering .
the weather won’t do .
“ beggar him , ” said miss havisham to estella .
once more , i stammered with difficulty that i had no objection .
“ pray come in , ” said mr pocket , junior .
“ no doubt he would be , if he could , ” returned the landlord , “ but he can’t .
i arrived on the ground with a quarter of an hour to spare , attended by the avenger , if i may connect that expression with one who never attended on me if he could possibly help it .
now , baby darling , come with ma !
“ astonishing !
” so , mr trabb measured and calculated me in the parlour , as if i were an estate and he the finest species of surveyor , and gave himself such a world of trouble that i felt that no suit of clothes could possibly remunerate him for his pains .
” herbert remonstrated .
chapter xxx .
there was a group assembled round the fire at the three jolly bargemen , attentive to mr wopsle as he read the newspaper aloud .
” said i .
following the wall of the jail , i found the roadway covered with straw to deaden the noise of passing vehicles ;
with her folded hands raised to me in the manner in which , when her poor heart was young and fresh and whole , they must often have been raised to heaven from her mother’s side .
the man , after looking at me for a moment , turned me upside down , and emptied my pockets .
she asked me and joe whether we supposed she was door-mats under our feet , and how we dared to use her so , and what company we graciously thought she was fit for ?
she laughed contemptuously , pushed me out , and locked the gate upon me .
in one or two instances there was a difficulty respecting the raising of fees , and then mr wemmick , backing as far as possible from the insufficient money produced , said , “ it’s no use , my boy .
suddenly , he clapped his large hand on the housekeeper’s , like a trap , as she stretched it across the table .
lot 2 on that part of the main building which had been so long shut up .
not a bit .
“ but ain’t he just pale though !
a smile crossed his face then , and he turned his eyes on me with a trustful look , as if he were confident that i had seen some small redeeming touch in him , even so long ago as when i was a little child .
no man spoke , but the steersman held up his hand , and all softly backed water , and kept the boat straight and true before it .
” giving him a still more tremendous one ;
tolerably , for i had gone up the staircase in the dark , many a time .
it was at a distance towards the east , but it was long and loud .
we waited for wemmick , and he made no sign .
chapter liii .
as i cried , i kicked the wall , and took a hard twist at my hair ;
“ and i’ll tell you where from .
there was something in the action , and in the light pressure of biddy’s wedding-ring , that had a very pretty eloquence in it .
they’ll do it , if there’s anything to be got by it .
put me aside for ever , you have done so , i well know , but bestow yourself on some worthier person than drummle .
nor you , sweet-tempered biddy !
“ what is it ?
the trial came on at once , and , when he was put to the bar , he was seated in a chair .
not as she is , but as she was when she first came here ?
when i had rendered homage to this light , he went on to say , in a friendly manner :
i am working up towards a partnership , you know .
two mutton-chops , three potatoes , some split peas , a little flour , two ounces of butter , a pinch of salt , and all this black pepper .
as there was a loft above , i called , “ is there any one here ?
it was no nominal meal that we were going to make , but a vigorous reality .
but she did not look up .
“ but yours cannot be dismissed ;
“ no ;
“ yes , and many others , all of them but you .
and mud , mud , mud , deep in all the streets .
“ yes , ” he replied ;
jeweller’s account , i think .
i confess that i expected to see my sister denounce him , and that i was disappointed by the different result .
“ did i never give her a burning love , inseparable from jealousy at all times , and from sharp pain , while she speaks thus to me !
” and we both went out to the drawbridge .
i were at the bargemen t’other night , pip ;
no .
“ you thinks custom ’us , jack ?
but i never shall forget these .
when the day came round for my return to the scene of the deed of violence , my terrors reached their height .
so , she gave a contemptuous toss but with a sense , i thought , of having made too sure that i was so wounded and left me .
i told him when i had arrived , and how miss havisham had wished me to come and see estella .
and i wondered when i peeped into one or two on the lower tiers , and saw the tied-up brown paper packets inside , whether the flower-seeds and bulbs ever wanted of a fine day to break out of those jails , and bloom .
when we were all out in the raw air and were steadily moving towards our business , i treasonably whispered to joe , “ i hope , joe , we shan’t find them .
“ he’s an invalid now , ” replied herbert .
ah , matthew , matthew !
“ no , no , pip !
then you have done all you have got to do .
” i took out my purse .
i saw he was about to come at me again , and i stopped him .
” one person of mild and benevolent aspect even gave me a tract ornamented with a woodcut of a malevolent young man fitted up with a perfect sausage-shop of fetters , and entitled to be read in my cell .
it brings in more confusion , and you want confusion .
now , another great advantage of all this is , that it was done without you , and when , if any one was concerning himself about your movements , you must be known to be ever so many miles off and quite otherwise engaged .
” said mr jaggers at last , as he moved towards the papers on the table .
so awful was the manner in which everything in him that it was most desirable to repress , started through that thin layer of pretence , and seemed to come blazing out at the crown of his head .
when i became joe’s ’prentice , orlick was perhaps confirmed in some suspicion that i should displace him ;
” he appeared to mean up the chimney , but i believe he intended to refer me to liverpool ;
ah !
then she said , “ why not tell you the truth ?
i am very desirous to serve a friend .
lay your arm out upon the back of the sofa , my dear boy , and i’ll sit down here , and get the bandage off so gradually that you shall not know when it comes .
“ then , as in general you stick to your work as well as most men , ” said joe , “ let it be a half-holiday for all .
and while i think it likely that it almost maddened her other lovers , i know too certainly that it almost maddened me .
i’ve come for good .
“ and they fought for veal-cutlets out of a silver basket .
“ here it is , ” said mr wopsle .
now , in groping my way down the black staircase i fell over something , and that something was a man crouching in a corner .
“ but there is another question , ” said herbert .
“ but yes , yes , she would call it so !
lord !
there was the red sun , on the low level of the shore , in a purple haze , fast deepening into black ;
then i thought if she were , as i feared , by no means rapturously grateful for that destiny yet , when would she begin to be interested in me ?
then there came , one night which appeared of great duration , and which teemed with anxiety and horror ;
“ no , no you may be sure of that , ” said estella .
?
i dined at what herbert and i used to call a geographical chop-house , where there were maps of the world in porter-pot rims on every half-yard of the tablecloths , and charts of gravy on every one of the knives , to this day there is scarcely a single chop-house within the lord mayor’s dominions which is not geographical , and wore out the time in dozing over crumbs , staring at gas , and baking in a hot blast of dinners .
the stranger , with a comfortable kind of grunt over his pipe , put his legs up on the settle that he had to himself .
it was so heavily overhung with cobwebs that its form was quite undistinguishable ;
“ i am here !
” said he .
“ i don’t !
“ i don’t understand you , ” said i .
mrs joe was going to break out , but joe went on .
“ i am going to london , miss pocket , ” said i , “ and want to say good-bye to miss havisham .
now you are to understand , secondly , mr pip , that the name of the person who is your liberal benefactor remains a profound secret , until the person chooses to reveal it .
” then , turning to me , “ served his majesty this man .
“ much good they’ll do me !
no one was near me when i went in and went home .
“ thank you , thank you very much .
and i have never forgot it !
“ i suppose there’s nothing to be done , ” exclaimed camilla , “ but comply and depart .
“ you assumed some name , i suppose , on board ship ?
but this i can say , that i never knew him put it to any other use .
how far might you call yourselves from the marshes , hereabouts ?
“ particularly ?
joe threw his eye over them , and pronounced that the job would necessitate the lighting of his forge fire , and would take nearer two hours than one .
” wemmick went on ;
” said joe , staring at me .
chapter xxxiii .
there were traces of his gore in that spot , and i covered them with garden-mould from the eye of man .
whenever that undecided prince had to ask a question or state a doubt , the public helped him out with it .
“ was there a great sensation ?
smoking with great complacency all the while .
“ glad to have seen you .
“ well !
again feeling it very sorrowful and strange that this , the second night of my bright fortunes , should be as lonely and unsatisfactory as the first .
waiting until she was quiet again , for this , too , flashed out of her in a wild and sudden way , i went on .
“ what is to be done with you ?
our charge would be sitter , and keep quiet ;
” said i .
“ biddy , ” said i , “ i think you might have written to me about these sad matters .
“ you thought !
herbert had seen startop , and he was more than ready to join .
you have been drawing pretty freely here ;
“ i’m not a-going back .
do not thou go home , let him not go home , let us not go home , do not ye or you go home , let not them go home .
“ that’s his secret .
and then repeated , with her former pleasant change , “ shall we walk a little farther , or go home ?
“ compeyson , he looks at me very noticing , and i look at him .
i want to know what is to be done .
his hands were now out of his sleeves , and i was shaking them ;
we are in our private and personal capacities , of course .
handel , my halloa !
the subject still held them when joe came in from his work to have a cup of tea .
“ i don’t mean in the village only , but up town ?
“ dear biddy , ” said i , “ you have the best husband in the whole world , and if you could have seen him by my bed you would have but no , you couldn’t love him better than you do .
” said joe .
but i had quite determined that it would be a heartless fraud to take more money from my patron in the existing state of my uncertain thoughts and plans .
“ you must know , ” said my sister , rising , “ it’s a pie ;
mrs pocket’s dignity was so crushing , that i felt quite abashed , as if i myself had done something to rouse it .
i know only one thing that i am fit for , and that is , to go for a soldier .
i looked again , and though she was still looking at me , the suggestion was gone .
“ where ?
from which , ” said wemmick , “ conjectures had been raised and theories formed .
“ tho’ i’m uncommon fond of reading , too .
if you are lost , your child is still saved .
i liked it for a few moments , but she flattered me so very grossly that the pleasure was soon over .
“ who d’ye live with , supposin’ you’re kindly let to live , which i han’t made up my mind about ?
what , surely must i understand ?
“ well , ” said joe , with the same appearance of profound cogitation , “ he is not no , not to deceive you , he is not my nevvy .
it was called mill pond bank , chinks’s basin ;
i thought so too , and i took him out for a walk next morning , and we talked immensely , understanding one another to perfection .
it could have been no worse .
” cried wemmick , “ i told you so !
one full of port , and one of sherry .
she might think you wanted something , expected something of her .
he hoped that with intelligent assistance i should meet with little to discourage me , and should soon be able to dispense with any aid but his .
now , go on , dear boy .
“ come in , pip .
i couldn’t keep my eyes off him .
“ and you are adopted by a rich person ?
how could it be , then , that i did not like her much the better of the two ?
” said mr jaggers , waving his hand at them to put them behind him .
faint and sick with the pain of my injured arm , bewildered by the surprise , and yet conscious how easily this threat could be put in execution , i desisted , and tried to ease my arm were it ever so little .
wemmick’s house was a little wooden cottage in the midst of plots of garden , and the top of it was cut out and painted like a battery mounted with guns .
the lime was burning with a sluggish stifling smell , but the fires were made up and left , and no workmen were visible .
you’ll be one-and-twenty before you know where you are , and then perhaps you’ll get some further enlightenment .
however , i come here some time since you left .
they both raised their eyes as i went in , and both saw an alteration in me .
millwood put me down in argument , on every occasion ;
at length little jane , perceiving its young brains to be imperilled , softly left her place , and with many small artifices coaxed the dangerous weapon away .
after a time , i tried in the dark both to get out , and to go back , but i could do neither until some streaks of day strayed in and showed me where to lay my hands .
it was , in effect , that the cook had mislaid the beef .
with a clink for the stout , old clem !
yet the room was all in all to me , estella being in it .
“ well ;
now , merely stopping it midway , beating it up , and humouring it in various parts of the room and against a good deal of the pattern of the paper on the wall , before he felt it safe to close with it ;
no one can say .
not with a spoon that was brought to him , but with a file .
thinking that he did this to give me an opportunity of taking his walworth sentiments , i seized the opportunity as soon as we were out of the castle .
neither of us spoke of the boat , but we both thought of it .
“ i merely want , mr jaggers , ” said i , “ to assure myself that what i have been told is true .
“ didn’t i tell you , ” said the other convict then , “ that he would murder me , if he could ?
stormy and wet , stormy and wet ;
he produced a long purse , with the greatest coolness , and counted them out on the table and pushed them over to me .
what else could be expected !
imposing on the waiter the wandering habits of putting the covers on the floor (where he fell over them) , the melted butter in the arm-chair , the bread on the bookshelves , the cheese in the coal-scuttle , and the boiled fowl into my bed in the next room , where i found much of its parsley and butter in a state of congelation when i retired for the night .
it led to my remarking , with more zeal than discretion , that it came with a bad grace from him , to whom startop had lent money in my presence but a week or so before .
i mean to explore those marshes for amusement .
“ gently , handel .
“ how dare you tell me so ?
” cried joe .
” retorted my sister , quick to resent his being wanted at all .
i don’t care who says contrairy ;
in my heart i believed her to be right ;
i quickened my pace , and knocked at the door with my hand .
she seemed much older than i , of course , being a girl , and beautiful and self-possessed ;
“ there has always been an estella , since i have heard of a miss havisham .
“ nor giv’ no one the office to follow you ?
“ pray don’t do it , sir .
“ i think , ” he answered , still with the end at his mouth and still observant of me , “ that i will drink (i thank you) afore i go .
you’re a listening and understanding , pip ?
“ where is he ?
“ thankee , pip .
“ i don’t spell it at all , ” said joe .
“ i have come into such good fortune since i saw you last , miss havisham , ” i murmured .
miss skiffins’s composure while she did this was one of the most remarkable sights i have ever seen , and if i could have thought the act consistent with abstraction of mind , i should have deemed that miss skiffins performed it mechanically .
mr wopsle’s great-aunt , besides keeping this educational institution , kept in the same room a little general shop .
we lived at the top of the last house , and the wind rushing up the river shook the house that night , like discharges of cannon , or breakings of a sea .
they awakened a tender emotion in me ;
“ yes ;
“ i have not heard the particulars of my sister’s death , biddy .
“ nothing the matter , ” returned the voice .
he told us that he held the whole house , but rarely used more of it than we saw .
“ gentlemen , ” said mr jaggers , deliberately putting down the glass , and hauling out his gold repeater by its massive chain , “ i am exceedingly sorry to announce that it’s half past nine .
we all began to suspect that mr wopsle was not the man we had thought him , and that he was beginning to be found out .
you ain’t looked slowly forward to this as i have ;
when i and my friends repaired to him at six o’clock next day , he seemed to have been engaged on a case of a darker complexion than usual , for we found him with his head butted into this closet , not only washing his hands , but laving his face and gargling his throat .
engaged .
whereas i now found barnard to be a disembodied spirit , or a fiction , and his inn the dingiest collection of shabby buildings ever squeezed together in a rank corner as a club for tom-cats .
and his patchwork-covered bed was in a little inner division or recess .
you , so young , untried , and beautiful , estella !
present !
i thought it a strange thing then , and i thought it a stranger thing long afterwards .
“ and i saw pistols in it , and jam , and pills .
” said i , looking at joe .
the effort of resolution necessary to the achievement of this purpose i found to be quite awful .
he gave the medical testimony , in pointed imitation of our local practitioner ;
say another word one single word and wemmick shall give you your money back .
we were seated by the fire , as just now described , and miss havisham still had estella’s arm drawn through her own , and still clutched estella’s hand in hers , when estella gradually began to detach herself .
“ perhaps i know more of estella’s history than even you do , ” said i .
“ christened pip ?
“ was that great guns , joe ?
her manner was more winning than she had cared to let it be to me before , and i thought i saw miss havisham’s influence in the change .
mr wopsle , with a majestic remembrance of old discomfiture , assented ;
i said i thought that would do handsomely .
” i interposed , as herbert paused .
” said i .
i was not so sure of that .
but i am tired of the life i have led , which has very few charms for me , and i am willing enough to change it .
i think the romans must have aggravated one another very much , with their noses .
o dear good faithful tender joe , i feel the loving tremble of your hand upon my arm , as solemnly this day as if it had been the rustle of an angel’s wing !
but of steam-ships , great and small , not a tithe or a twentieth part so many .
” mr pumblechook was in favour of a handsome premium for binding me apprentice to some genteel trade , say , the corn and seed trade , for instance .
the queen of denmark , a very buxom lady , though no doubt historically brazen , was considered by the public to have too much brass about her ;
i don’t want it to do me more good than it does now , ” said my convict , with a greedy laugh .
“ but a public-house may keep a gentleman .
my earnestness awoke a wonder in her that seemed as if it would have been touched with compassion , if she could have rendered me at all intelligible to her own mind .
no estella .
mr jaggers gave me your note yesterday , and i have lost no time .
a lady by whom he was accompanied .
don’t cry , old chap !
it was the first time that a grave had opened in my road of life , and the gap it made in the smooth ground was wonderful .
part with the child , unless it should be necessary to produce it to clear you , and then it shall be produced .
he wishes me most particular to write what larks .
“ i was your first teacher though ;
“ five more days , and then the day before the day !
“ and they took his till , and they took his cash-box , and they drinked his wine , and they partook of his wittles , and they slapped his face , and they pulled his nose , and they tied him up to his bedpust , and they giv’ him a dozen , and they stuffed his mouth full of flowering annuals to prewent his crying out .
he saw me , and over my shoulder he saw the man .
the waiter coughed , as if he modestly invited me to get over that .
she gradually withdrew her eyes from me , and turned them on the fire .
he gloated over every abhorrent adjective in the description , and identified himself with every witness at the inquest .
“ and mr jaggers is made your guardian ?
” and i told him what i had not mentioned in my narrative , of that encounter with the other convict .
“ and what wind , ” said miss havisham , “ blows you here , pip ?
it was not to be shuffled off now , however , and i answered , “ the beautiful young lady at miss havisham’s , and she’s more beautiful than anybody ever was , and i admire her dreadfully , and i want to be a gentleman on her account .
” said my convict , wiping blood from his face with his ragged sleeves , and shaking torn hair from his fingers :
when he came to the low church wall , he got over it , like a man whose legs were numbed and stiff , and then turned round to look for me .
we got ashore among some slippery stones while we ate and drank what we had with us , and looked about .
i thought how one link of association had helped that identification in the theatre , and how such a link , wanting before , had been riveted for me now , when i had passed by a chance swift from estella’s name to the fingers with their knitting action , and the attentive eyes .
we used to walk between the two places at all hours .
joe is a dear good fellow , in fact , i think he is the dearest fellow that ever lived , but he is rather backward in some things .
this was the time for wemmick to produce a little kettle , a tray of glasses , and a black bottle with a porcelain-topped cork , representing some clerical dignitary of a rubicund and social aspect .
” moaned miss havisham , pushing away her grey hair with both her hands .
as i stood idle by mr jaggers’s fire , its rising and falling flame made the two casts on the shelf look as if they were playing a diabolical game at bo-peep with me ;
we are in our private and personal capacities , and we have been engaged in a confidential transaction before to-day .
“ besides , the cook has always been a very nice respectful woman , and said in the most natural manner when she came to look after the situation , that she felt i was born to be a duchess .
“ what ?
there’s jaggers , and there’s wemmick , and there’s you .
look at these here lodgings of yourn , fit for a lord !
i dropped into the office to ask if mr jaggers had come in yet , and i found he had not , and i strolled out again .
” then i asked if there were many clerks ?
“ whose child was estella ?
“ i start for london , miss havisham , to-morrow , ” i was exceedingly careful what i said , “ and i thought you would kindly not mind my taking leave of you .
“ i know why , ” said the jack .
i established with myself , on these occasions , the reputation of a first-rate man of business , prompt , decisive , energetic , clear , cool-headed .
chapter x .
he had been ominously heard of , through the play-bills , as a faithful black , in connection with a little girl of noble birth , and a monkey .
“ well , well , well !
your guardian was not at that time in miss havisham’s counsels , and she was too haughty and too much in love to be advised by any one .
when the waiter had felt my fast-cooling teapot with the palm of his hand , and had looked imploringly at me , and had gone out , drummle , careful not to move the shoulder next me , took a cigar from his pocket and bit the end off , but showed no sign of stirring .
i feel a particular interest in being acquainted with it .
when i got home at night , and delivered this message for joe , my sister “ went on the rampage , ” in a more alarming degree than at any previous period .
“ you know he has nothing to recommend him but money and a ridiculous roll of addle-headed predecessors ;
in every single thing i went for , i went for you .
the king upon his throne , with his crown upon his ed , can’t sit and write his acts of parliament in print , without having begun , when he were a unpromoted prince , with the alphabet .
and over where her heart’s broke you broke it !
“ no , dear boy , ” he said , in the same tone as before , “ that don’t go first .
i must not leave it to be supposed that we were ever a great house , or that we made mints of money .
in what station of life is this man ?
” said mrs pocket , looking off her book for a moment , “ everybody’s tumbling !
that i had seen him down in the ditch tearing and fighting like a wild beast .
i’ll tell you something more , wolf .
“ he is more in the secrets of every place , i think , ” said estella , in a low voice .
however , i came into town on the monday night to be ready for joe , and i got up early in the morning , and caused the sitting-room and breakfast-table to assume their most splendid appearance .
” said drummle , by way of answering me .
“ they made themselves my friends , ” said i , “ when they supposed me to have superseded them ;
after a short pause of repose , miss skiffins in the absence of the little servant who , it seemed , retired to the bosom of her family on sunday afternoons washed up the tea-things , in a trifling lady-like amateur manner that compromised none of us .
nothing has been in my thoughts so distinctly as his putting himself in the way of being taken .
“ o !
“ how should i know ?
i would not have listened for more , if i could have heard more ;
i said , decidedly .
you hear the condition of your going ?
“ then there was firing !
for now , the very breath of the beans and clover whispered to my heart that the day must come when it would be well for my memory that others walking in the sunshine should be softened as they thought of me .
will he ?
i , trembling in spirit and worshipping the very hem of her dress ;
“ waiter !
let me go !
“ let me tell you what evidence i have seen of it .
when it was over , he said , weighing in his hand the purse he had ceased to swing :
lookee here , pip , at what is said to you by a true friend .
both were bleeding and panting and execrating and struggling ;
on my objecting to this retreat , he took us into another room with a dinner-table for thirty , and in the grate a scorched leaf of a copy-book under a bushel of coal-dust .
when this horrible din had lasted a certain time , it mechanically awoke mr wopsle’s great-aunt , who staggered at a boy fortuitously , and pulled his ears .
she was still very ill , though considered something better .
miss havisham never wrote to me , nor had i ever so much as seen her handwriting .
that’s my life pretty much , down to such times as i got shipped off , arter pip stood my friend .
“ does pumblechook say so ?
staring distrustfully while he did so at the mist all round us , and often stopping even stopping his jaws to listen .
“ and what’s worse , she’s got tickler with her .
i can only suppose now , that it was a part of his policy , as a very clever man , habitually to deceive his own instruments .
at first , i had to shut some gates after me , and now and then to stand still while the cattle that were lying in the banked-up pathway arose and blundered down among the grass and reeds .
“ he does not make it , ” said i , “ and has never made it , and has no knowledge or belief that his daughter is in existence .
“ now my young friend , ” my guardian began , as if i were a witness in the box , “ i am going to have a word or two with you .
“ less coarse and common ?
“ no , ” he acquiesced :
now , joe , examining this iron with a smith’s eye , declared it to have been filed asunder some time ago .
“ not the exact words !
“ i sat with provis last night , handel , two good hours .
do you find any gypsies , now , or tramps , or vagrants of any sort , out there ?
being a back second floor up a yard , of a grimy presence in all particulars , and with a look into another back second floor , rather than a look out .
joe recited this couplet with such manifest pride and careful perspicuity , that i asked him if he had made it himself .
a river’s its natural depth , and he’s his natural depth .
as joe got on his coat , he mustered courage to propose that some of us should go down with the soldiers and see what came of the hunt .
melted at heart , as i was , by the thought that i had taken no farewell , and never now could take farewell of those who were dear to me , or could explain myself to them , or ask for their compassion on my miserable errors , still , if i could have killed him , even in dying , i would have done it .
joe and biddy were very sympathetic and pleasant when i spoke of our approaching separation ;
happily i slipped away , and deposited that part of my conscience in my garret bedroom .
it was an odd sensation to see his very familiar face established quite at home in that very unfamiliar room and region ;
“ am i pretty ?
half a moment !
i started at every footstep and every sound , believing that he was discovered and taken , and this was the messenger to tell me so .
which i meantersay that what i say , i meantersay and stand or fall by !
play .
it was like my own marsh country , flat and monotonous , and with a dim horizon ;
it was the night afore the great race , when i found him on the heath , in a booth that i know’d on .
therefore , i said nothing of him .
” “ and eight ?
it’s only that .
as they were coming on at full speed , we got the two bags ready , and took that opportunity of saying good-bye to herbert and startop .
“ lord bless you , sir , well we knows that !
not to me .
i’ve seen my boy , and he can be a gentleman without me .
he rubbed first one of them , and then the other , in a most uncongenial and uncomfortable manner , with the round knob on the top of the poker .
but if i can ever do more , from a walworth point of view , and in a strictly private and personal capacity , i shall be glad to do it .
it was a needless question , for a new desolation in the desolate house had told me so .
as we walked along westward , he was recognised ever and again by some face in the crowd of the streets , and whenever that happened he talked louder to me ;
she treated me as a boy still , but she lured me on .
“ mr and mrs hubble might like to see you in your new gen-teel figure too , pip , ” said joe , industriously cutting his bread , with his cheese on it , in the palm of his left hand , and glancing at my untasted supper as if he thought of the time when we used to compare slices .
i modestly assented , and we all fell through a little dirty swing door , into a sort of hot packing-case immediately behind it .
presently , joe came back , saying that the man was gone , but that he , joe , had left word at the three jolly bargemen concerning the notes .
” said the landlord .
i had told wemmick of his showing us her wrists , that day of the dinner party .
others has done it safe afore , and what others has done afore , others can do agen .
or whether i , who had never yet been abroad , should propose an expedition .
“ can i take you , estella !
while the winding river turned and turned , and the great floating buoys upon it turned and turned , and everything else seemed stranded and still .
“ yes , i am to rest here a little , and i am to drink some tea , and you are to take care of me the while .
“ why didn’t you ever go to school , joe , when you were as little as me ?
“ might be deduced from that text .
so , i went out to walworth again , and yet again , and yet again , and i saw him by appointment in the city several times , but never held any communication with him on the subject in or near little britain .
i had fallen into my serene state one evening , when we heard a letter dropped through the slit in the said door , and fall on the ground .
“ hah !
have you quite forgotten her ?
we took our seats at the round table , and my guardian kept drummle on one side of him , while startop sat on the other .
“ and i want a fashionable suit of clothes to go in .
” cried mr jaggers .
i had previously sought in my pockets for the letter , that i might refer to it again ;
but i could make nothing of the word .
i derived from this speech that mr herbert pocket (for herbert was the pale young gentleman’s name) still rather confounded his intention with his execution .
” and looked at me in a particularly unpleasant and personal manner .
but , it was half-past one before we saw her smoke , and soon afterwards we saw behind it the smoke of another steamer .
“ yes , ” she returned , again nodding steadily , “ i let you go on .
” politely omitting young fellow .
the time when one would be due where we lay , wherever that might be , could be calculated pretty nearly , if we made inquiries beforehand .
“ certainly , poor joe !
where wemmick told me , as he smoked a pipe , that it had taken him a good many years to bring the property up to its present pitch of perfection .
she did not appear when we afterwards went up to miss havisham’s room , and we four played at whist .
a little later on in the dinner , mr wopsle reviewed the sermon with some severity , and intimated in the usual hypothetical case of the church being “ thrown open ” what kind of sermon he would have given them .
chapter xliii .
“ now , ” said wemmick , “ questioning being over , ” which he emphasised and repeated for my guidance , “ i come to what i did , after hearing what i heard .
“ perhaps i do , herbert .
i faltered again , “ i don’t know .
“ same to you , colonel .
“ or what ?
i still held her forcibly down with all my strength , like a prisoner who might escape ;
but you’ll never catch ’em asking any questions of my principal .
“ why , see what a letter you wrote last night !
she were in poor elth , and quite broke .
do you see those grovelling and wandering eyes ?
“ what’s that ?
when his body was found , many miles from the scene of his death , and so horribly disfigured that he was only recognisable by the contents of his pockets , notes were still legible , folded in a case he carried .
throughout this part of our intercourse , and it lasted , as will presently be seen , for what i then thought a long time , she habitually reverted to that tone which expressed that our association was forced upon us .
anything to equal the determined reticence of mr jaggers under that roof i never saw elsewhere , even in him .
” said camilla .
“ is that the name of this house , miss ?
” said wemmick , “ that’s over !
“ yes , dear boy .
and there were some odd objects about , that i should not have expected to see , such as an old rusty pistol , a sword in a scabbard , several strange-looking boxes and packages , and two dreadful casts on a shelf , of faces peculiarly swollen , and twitchy about the nose .
that is to say :
my state of mind , as i have described it , began before i was up in the morning , and lasted long after the subject had died out , and had ceased to be mentioned saving on exceptional occasions .
“ i might as well ask you , ” said biddy , “ how you manage ?
this is your bedroom ;
and when i shaded my face with my hands and looked through the black windows (opening them ever so little was out of the question in the teeth of such wind and rain) , i saw that the lamps in the court were blown out , and that the lamps on the bridges and the shore were shuddering , and that the coal-fires in barges on the river were being carried away before the wind like red-hot splashes in the rain .
on a monday morning , when herbert and i were at breakfast , i received the following letter from wemmick by the post .
after a little further conversation to the same effect , we returned into the castle where we found miss skiffins preparing tea .
would you like to have a look at newgate ?
“ i am far from happy , miss havisham ;
“ also georgiana .
put the case that a woman , under such circumstances as you have mentioned , held her child concealed , and was obliged to communicate the fact to her legal adviser , on his representing to her that he must know , with an eye to the latitude of his defence , how the fact stood about that child .
mr trabb had sliced his hot roll into three feather-beds , and was slipping butter in between the blankets , and covering it up .
i said it (people often do so , in such cases) like a rather reluctant concession to truth and justice ;
accordingly , i started at once , and she leaned upon my shoulder , and we went away at a pace that might have been an imitation (founded on my first impulse under that roof) of mr pumblechook’s chaise-cart .
that is , it doesn’t pay me anything , and i have to keep myself .
“ here comes the mare , ” said joe , “ ringing like a peal of bells !
“ there appeared upon the scene say at the races , or the public balls , or anywhere else you like a certain man , who made love to miss havisham .
“ take notice , guard , he tried to murder me , ” were his first words .
here’s a ring !
jane , indeed !
i don’t like him .
it is not possible to know how far the influence of any amiable honest-hearted duty-doing man flies out into the world ;
it seemed , while it lasted , to be all alight and alive with that inexplicable feeling i had had before ;
merely observing that he must take charge of everything his prisoner had about him .
“ this friend , ” i pursued , “ is trying to get on in commercial life , but has no money , and finds it difficult and disheartening to make a beginning .
you seem to breathe quickly .
what was the nameless shadow which again in that one instant had passed ?
one sunday when joe , greatly enjoying his pipe , had so plumed himself on being “ most awful dull , ” that i had given him up for the day , i lay on the earthwork for some time with my chin on my hand , descrying traces of miss havisham and estella all over the prospect , in the sky and in the water , until at last i resolved to mention a thought concerning them that had been much in my head .
much surprised by the request , i took the note .
we was in the same prison-ship , but i couldn’t get at him for long , though i tried .
” said joe , in a very decided manner .
“ but my dear young friend , ” said mr pumblechook , “ you must be hungry , you must be exhausted .
what he did on those occasions was to turn up his cuffs , stick up his hair , and give us mark antony’s oration over the body of caesar .
but we were so much the lighter and easier for having broached it , that i now perceived this to be the case .
“ do you know this ?
she read me what she had written ;
“ the same .
even after that crisis in our affairs , he got up and turned round and round confusedly a few times , not knowing where i was ;
“ i don’t want to go .
why , here’s three js , and three os , and three j-o , joes in it , pip !
he who had been presented in the worst light at his trial , who had since broken prison and had been tried again , who had returned from transportation under a life sentence , and who had occasioned the death of the man who was the cause of his arrest .
“ guilty , of course ?
“ could i make a guess , i wonder , ” said the convict , “ at your income since you come of age !
“ and she might credit it .
the only remark i ever heard him make on your story , was the final one , “ the thing is settled and done , or mr jaggers would not be in it .
thus we held on , speaking little , for four or five dull miles .
“ i am glad to have the chance of bidding you good-bye , mr wemmick , ” said the man , stretching out his hand between two bars .
“ what do you mean , sir ?
i was secretly afraid of him when i saw him so dexterous ;
when he looked out from his shelter in the distance , and saw that i waved my hat to him to come up , he rejoined me , and there we waited ;
no glimpse of daylight was to be seen in it .
” said my sister .
“ it warn’t easy , pip , for me to leave them parts , nor yet it warn’t safe .
i’ll engage there’s no tar in that :
“ who else should there be ?
for a moment i looked wildly round my trap for any chance of escape ;
“ lookee here , old chap , ” said joe , bending over me .
“ well , mr wemmick , ” said the turnkey , who kept us between the two studded and spiked lodge gates , and who carefully locked one before he unlocked the other , “ what’s mr jaggers going to do with that water-side murder ?
this gave me opportunities of being with him that i could not otherwise have had .
at the stairs where we had taken him abroad , and ever since , i had looked warily for any token of our being suspected .
they all had a listless and dreary air of waiting somebody’s pleasure , and the most talkative of the ladies had to speak quite rigidly to repress a yawn .
“ luck changes ,’ says compeyson ;
shall i give you a ride , miss havisham ?
but he wore great bright creaking boots , and , in poising himself on these boots , with his large head bent down and his eyebrows joined together , awaiting an answer , he sometimes caused the boots to creak , as if they laughed in a dry and suspicious way .
try another .
the last word grated on me ;
“ i wrote it to new south wales .
on the day before it , i received an official note from wemmick , informing me that mr jaggers would be glad if i would call upon him at five in the afternoon of the auspicious day .
when he had done this , and had not lifted himself up at all , he quietly went on with what he was about .
does he like the trade ?
whether i had two or three times come to myself on the staircase with great terror , not knowing how i had got out of bed ;
the second piece was the last new grand comic christmas pantomime , in the first scene of which , it pained me to suspect that i detected mr wopsle with red worsted legs under a highly magnified phosphoric countenance and a shock of red curtain-fringe for his hair , engaged in the manufacture of thunderbolts in a mine , and displaying great cowardice when his gigantic master came home (very hoarse) to dinner .
” said i .
it has inspired me with great commiseration , and i hope i understand it and its influences .
“ i couldn’t undertake to say that , of my own knowledge .
” said mr jaggers , looking shrewdly at me , and then shutting up his eyes while he waited for my answer .
chapter xx .
it was soon done , and the boat was brought round to the temple stairs , and lay where i could reach her within a minute or two .
done with their buttons !
” these words had such a round and convincing sound for him that he said them twice .
“ i feel thankful that i have been ill , joe , ” i said .
“ then it must be a shilling , ” observed the coachman .
“ he was so obliging as to suggest my father for your tutor , and he called on my father to propose it .
“ now , i have nothing to say to you , ” said mr jaggers , throwing his finger at them .
he wasted , and became slowly weaker and worse , day by day , from the day when the prison door closed upon him .
“ to judge from appearances , you’re out of luck ,’ says compeyson to me .
for , then i was worse than ever , and began haunting the coach-office in wood street , cheapside , before the coach had left the blue boar in our town .
“ do you ?
” replied biddy .
you’ll hear one presently .
“ so i would , handel , only they are staring me out of countenance .
when i was younger , i had had a general belief that if he had jiggered me personally , he would have done it with a sharp and twisted hook .
“ lookee here , old chap , ” said joe .
“ done with their buttons ?
“ estella , take him down .
the unqualified truth is , that when i loved estella with the love of a man , i loved her simply because i found her irresistible .
” i asked .
but i interrupt you in what you said to biddy .
it almost seemed to me as if he must stoop down presently , to file at his leg .
i think it would hardly serve her to establish her parentage for the information of her husband , and to drag her back to disgrace , after an escape of twenty years , pretty secure to last for life .
“ no , ” said she , and shook her head and looked about her .
“ nevvy ?
what are you stopping for ?
it’s quite a story , and shall be saved till dinner-time .
exactly what i myself had thought , many times .
” my sister catching him in the act , he drew the back of his hand across his nose with his usual conciliatory air on such occasions , and looked at her .
no ;
“ miss estella .
“ you are the husband of the sister of this boy ?
i could not have said what i was afraid of , for my fear was altogether undefined and vague , but there was great fear upon me .
i’ve been locked up as much as a silver tea-kittle .
he was prematurely bald on the top of his head , and had bushy black eyebrows that wouldn’t lie down but stood up bristling .
as drummle and startop had each a boat , i resolved to set up mine , and to cut them both out .
“ that’s all right , ” said he , rubbing his hands .
it had not occurred to me before , that he had led up to the theme for the purpose of clearing it out of our way ;
“ he and i are great friends now .
mr pocket uttered a dismal groan .
and by george , sir , it’s a thing worth mentioning , that of all the people who come to this gate , the secret of those pulls is only known to the aged , miss skiffins , and me !
“ ah !
“ i think so .
i was perfectly frantic , a reckless witness under the torture , and would have told them anything .
“ were you at his performance , joe ?
never even hinted , for instance , that your patron might have views as to your marriage ultimately ?
“ why , i suppose you have not done such a thing these twelve months .
if it had been in my constitution to be a lighter grubber , i might ha’ got into lighter trouble .
” he tilted me again .
i faltered , “ i don’t know .
and it was made the more difficult by the unconscious joe .
chapter l .
“ take a chair , mr pip , ” said my guardian .
“ well , you see it wos me , and single-handed .
“ which leaves us to ourselves , don’t you see , mr pip ?
i am quite ready to stay behind .
finding that he could not see us very well from where he sat , he got up , and threw one leg over the back of a chair and leaned upon it ;
“ it’s the end of may , pip .
or i would , very gladly .
there we stood , well squared up before it , shoulder to shoulder and foot to foot , with our hands behind us , not budging an inch .
it was you .
” said wemmick , touching me on the breast with his forefinger ;
my walworth sentiments must be taken at walworth ;
when i looked back at joe in the long passage , he was still weighing his hat with the greatest care , and was coming after us in long strides on the tips of his toes .
i can walk quite strongly .
” asked the sergeant , confidentially .
but on the whole he got on very well indeed ;
and they always begin by asking questions .
but of course i knew them both directly .
because it is a principle of his that no man who was not a true gentleman at heart ever was , since the world began , a true gentleman in manner .
my young conductress locked the gate , and we went across the courtyard .
the only independent one among them , he warned her that she was doing too much for this man , and was placing herself too unreservedly in his power .
the great city was almost new to her , she told me , for she had never left miss havisham’s neighbourhood until she had gone to france , and she had merely passed through london then in going and returning .
what are you a-doing of this afternoon , mum !
she quite gloated on these questions and answers , so keen was her enjoyment of sarah pocket’s jealous dismay .
how did i know it ?
an open door afforded a perspective view of the aged in bed .
then i washed and dressed while they knocked the furniture about and made a dust ;
when we had shaken hands and he was gone , i opened the staircase window and had nearly beheaded myself , for , the lines had rotted away , and it came down like the guillotine .
it was not asked , and you see me here .
“ yes , ” said i .
and when the verdict come , warn’t it compeyson as was recommended to mercy on account of good character and bad company , and giving up all the information he could agen me , and warn’t it me as got never a word but guilty ?
i had thought of him more than once .
they were strengthened into certainty when i beheld the aged enter at a side door , escorting a lady .
good-afternoon , colonel .
“ very much , ” was wemmick’s reply , “ for i have had my legs under the desk all day , and shall be glad to stretch them .
this was coming to the point , and i thought it a sensible way of expressing himself .
at the same time recommending mrs pocket to take notice that the handles of that instrument were not likely to agree with its eyes , and sharply charging miss jane to look after the same .
and but for his illness he would have been put in irons , for he was regarded as a determined prison-breaker , and i know not what else .
as she gave it to me playfully , for her darker mood had been but momentary i held it and put it to my lips .
and so he is .
doing as i had often done , i went in , and stood touching the old chimney-piece , where she could see me when she raised her eyes .
when i awoke , i was much surprised to find joe sitting beside me , smoking his pipe .
“ and miss jane , come and dance to baby , do !
biddy was astir so early to get my breakfast , that , although i did not sleep at the window an hour , i smelt the smoke of the kitchen fire when i started up with a terrible idea that it must be late in the afternoon .
does any one live , who knows what a steady memory you have , half as well as i do ?
and i saw in his hand a stone-hammer with a long heavy handle .
“ and then you will be married , herbert ?
the i-de-a !
when the moment was past , she looked down at the fire again .
it was , that my admiration should be within a foot or two of him , it was , that my feelings should be in the same place with him , that , was the agonizing circumstance .
now , as they went along , herbert reflected , that i might , after all , have been brought there on some genuine and serviceable errand tending to provis’s safety , and , bethinking himself that in that case interruption must be mischievous , left his guide and startop on the edge of the quarry , and went on by himself , and stole round the house two or three times , endeavouring to ascertain whether all was right within .
“ whatever family opinions , or whatever the world’s opinions , on that subject may be , pip , your sister is , ” joe tapped the top bar with the poker after every word following , “ a-fine-figure of a woman !
on the next day of my attendance , when our usual exercise was over , and i had landed her at her dressing-table , she stayed me with a movement of her impatient fingers :
what is your own experience of him ?
but we held our own without any appearance of molestation .
mr trabb then bent over number four , and in a sort of deferential confidence recommended it to me as a light article for summer wear , an article much in vogue among the nobility and gentry , an article that it would ever be an honour to him to reflect upon a distinguished fellow-townsman’s (if he might claim me for a fellow-townsman) having worn .
“ not a ha’porth .
“ say tea then , ” said herbert , pouring it out .
when i was very small and timid , he gave me to understand that the devil lived in a black corner of the forge , and that he knew the fiend very well :
my sister had been standing silent in the yard , within hearing , she was a most unscrupulous spy and listener , and she instantly looked in at one of the windows .
as i looked along the clustered roofs , with church-towers and spires shooting into the unusually clear air , the sun rose up , and a veil seemed to be drawn from the river , and millions of sparkles burst out upon its waters .
“ this door sticks so !
“ and was that honour !
summun had run away from me a man a tinker and he’d took the fire with him , and left me wery cold .
that i knew better .
looking towards the open window , i saw light wreaths from joe’s pipe floating there , and i fancied it was like a blessing from joe , not obtruded on me or paraded before me , but pervading the air we shared together .
i had scarcely arrived at the total when a seventh was heard , as in the region of air , wailing dolefully .
it appeared to me that i could do no better than secure him some quiet lodging hard by , of which he might take possession when herbert returned :
“ i am going to live , ” said she , “ at a great expense , with a lady there , who has the power or says she has of taking me about , and introducing me , and showing people to me and showing me to people .
there is no doubt that she perfectly idolized him .
and now i became aware that other people were waiting about for mr jaggers , as well as i .
oh !
“ if you please , sir .
“ is who dead , dear boy ?
the closet whispered , the fireplace sighed , the little washing-stand ticked , and one guitar-string played occasionally in the chest of drawers .
in this strain of consolation , herbert informed me the invisible barley would commune with himself by the day and night together ;
but you know what i mean .
whether from the inn yard , or the street , or where not , and as drummle leaned down from the saddle and lighted his cigar and laughed , with a jerk of his head towards the coffee-room windows , the slouching shoulders and ragged hair of this man whose back was towards me reminded me of orlick .
“ three rums !
the second of the two meetings referred to in the last chapter occurred about a week after the first .
but there was a little greasy memorandum-book kept in a drawer , which served as a catalogue of prices , and by this oracle biddy arranged all the shop transactions .
yet , having already made his fortune in his own mind , he was so unassuming with it that i felt quite grateful to him for not being puffed up .
you done it ;
i’ve put away money , only for you to spend .
whereas the boar had cultivated my good opinion with warm assiduity when i was coming into property , the boar was exceedingly cool on the subject now that i was going out of property .
“ i have seen it , herbert , and dreamed of it , ever since the fatal night of his arrival .
“ don’t you know ?
sometimes , she would be quite familiar with me ;
it was a fresh kind of place , all circumstances considered , where the wind from the river had room to turn itself round ;
his getting on his box , which i remember to have been decorated with an old weather-stained pea-green hammercloth moth-eaten into rags , was quite a work of time .
have you found it ?
“ but , joe .
but it promised to last a long time , when the page came in with the announcement of a domestic affliction .
i coaxed myself to sleep by thinking of miss havisham’s , next wednesday ;
it’s opposed to my orders to hold the gate open .
there had been some light snow , overnight , and it lay nowhere else to my knowledge ;
on meeting my eye , he said plainly , by a momentary and silent pause in that attitude , “ indeed ?
he himself confessed that if the church was “ thrown open , ” meaning to competition , he would not despair of making his mark in it .
but , uncle pumblechook , who was omnipotent in that kitchen , wouldn’t hear the word , wouldn’t hear of the subject , imperiously waved it all away with his hand , and asked for hot gin and water .
“ should i fling myself away upon the man who would the soonest feel (if people do feel such things) that i took nothing to him ?
” i exclaimed , in amazement .
indeed you are already mentioned .
estella opened the gate as usual , and , the moment she appeared , joe took his hat off and stood weighing it by the brim in both his hands ;
“ i don’t think it would answer .
so i thought i had better ask .
no , he wouldn’t .
these i steeped in hot water , and so from the whole of these appliances extracted one cup of i don’t know what for estella .
“ on whom should i fling myself away ?
having filled his pipe , he put the surplus tobacco back again , as if his pocket were a drawer .
” she returned .
“ regular rules !
so cold , so lonely , so dreary all !
but now about this other matter .
it was much harder work now , but herbert and startop persevered , and rowed and rowed and rowed until the sun went down .
nothing was needed but this ;
“ him ?
need you say it face to face ?
what do you want ?
at last his father disinherited him ;
there , we meant to lie by all night .
“ no , no , ” my guardian assented ;
but this was not the worst of it .
it rose under my hand , and the door yielded .
after breakfast , joe brought out my indentures from the press in the best parlour , and we put them in the fire , and i felt that i was free .
now it appeared to him (pumblechook) that if that capital were got into the business , through a sleeping partner , sir , which sleeping partner would have nothing to do but walk in , by self or deputy , whenever he pleased , and examine the books , and walk in twice a year and take his profits away in his pocket , to the tune of fifty per cent , it appeared to him that that might be an opening for a young gentleman of spirit combined with property , which would be worthy of his attention .
some medical beast had revived tar-water in those days as a fine medicine , and mrs joe always kept a supply of it in the cupboard ;
“ yes , ” she replied ;
” i was startled , for i had some shadowy idea (and i am afraid i must add , hope) that joe had divorced her in a favour of the lords of the admiralty , or treasury .
a cold silvery mist had veiled the afternoon , and the moon was not yet up to scatter it .
“ how much ?
” remarked camilla , amiably repressing a sob , while a hitch came into her upper lip , and her tears overflowed .
startop , younger in years and appearance , was reading and holding his head , as if he thought himself in danger of exploding it with too strong a charge of knowledge .
“ nonsense .
the client looked scared , but bewildered too , as if he were unconscious what he had done .
previous to placing it before him , he went into the aged’s room with a clean white cloth , and tied the same under the old gentleman’s chin , and propped him up , and put his nightcap on one side , and gave him quite a rakish air .
“ here’s miss skiffins !
to hear him !
” said i .
the terrors that had assailed me whenever mrs joe had gone near the pantry , or out of the room , were only to be equalled by the remorse with which my mind dwelt on what my hands had done .
“ oh dear , not at all !
there’s no better rule .
then , we went into the hut , where there was a smell of tobacco and whitewash , and a bright fire , and a lamp , and a stand of muskets , and a drum , and a low wooden bedstead , like an overgrown mangle without the machinery , capable of holding about a dozen soldiers all at once .
“ i will say , informed , mr jaggers .
“ no , sir , ” returned wemmick ;
then , between his height and them , he slips in his subordinate , don’t you see ?
“ and if you keep it under your skirts like that , who’s to help tumbling ?
which i meantersay , if the ghost of a man’s own father cannot be allowed to claim his attention , what can , sir ?
i was looking at her with pleasure and admiration , when suddenly the growl swelled into a roar again , and a frightful bumping noise was heard above , as if a giant with a wooden leg were trying to bore it through the ceiling to come at us .
“ oh !
i have never been unfaithful to you or your schooling .
“ where was clara ?
moving the lamp as the man moved , i made out that he was substantially dressed , but roughly , like a voyager by sea .
they were brought in by flopson and millers , much as though those two non-commissioned officers had been recruiting somewhere for children and had enlisted these , while mrs pocket looked at the young nobles that ought to have been as if she rather thought she had had the pleasure of inspecting them before , but didn’t quite know what to make of them .
“ that’s it , pip , ” said joe ;
i don’t want you to find me .
the appointed punishment for his return to the land that had cast him out , being death , and his case being this aggravated case , he must prepare himself to die .
i cautioned him that i must hear no more of that ;
the joy attended mr wopsle through his struggle with laertes on the brink of the orchestra and the grave , and slackened no more until he had tumbled the king off the kitchen-table , and had died by inches from the ankles upward .
“ my bill , sir !
poultry , poultry !
on these occasions , wemmick took his books and papers into mr jaggers’s room , and one of the upstairs clerks came down into the outer office .
come , come , ” said estella , smiling delightfully , “ you must not expect me to go to school to you ;
come ?
” joe considered a little before he discovered this word ;
indeed it was understood among his acquaintance that if you could only give him his head , he would read the clergyman into fits ;
“ i am greatly changed .
“ halloa , mr pip !
and the landlord , having no one to reply upon , found it impracticable to pursue the subject .
lying on the flat of his back like a drifting old dead flounder , here’s your old bill barley , bless your eyes .
but was made to swallow that (much to his disturbance , as he sat slowly munching and meditating before the fire) , “ because he had had a turn .
mr jaggers , putting a hand on my shoulder and walking me on at his side without saying anything to me , addressed himself to his followers .
and joe got in beside me , and we drove away together into the country , where the rich summer growth was already on the trees and on the grass , and sweet summer scents filled all the air .
finally , i went out into the air , with a dim perception that there was something unwonted in the conduct of the sunshine , and found that i had slumberously got to the turnpike without having taken any account of the road .
well !
” said the lady at the table .
chapter vi .
” administering the definition like tar-water .
“ how can i ?
but , to be sure , the tide was high , and there might have been some footprints under water .
here we are !
“ i dare say you wonder at me , mr pip ;
what have i done !
” and we went on again .
while mrs pocket tripped up the family with her footstool , read her book of dignities , lost her pocket-handkerchief , told us about her grandpapa , and taught the young idea how to shoot , by shooting it into bed whenever it attracted her notice .
” said i .
i know him !
“ thankee !
in truth , he said this with so much delicacy , that i felt the subject done with , even though i should be under his father’s roof for years and years to come .
don’t tell me anything :
the meaner he , the nobler joe .
that matter of herbert’s was still progressing , and everything with me was as i have brought it down to the close of the last preceding chapter .
“ very good , sir .
and there were four similar occasions , to the best of my remembrance .
“ i’ll tell you , however , ” said i , “ whether you want to know or not .
i have never shown any weakness that i can charge myself with .
there can be no harm in your going here to-night , and seeing for yourself that all is well with tom , jack , or richard , before you go home , which is another reason for your not going home last night .
“ go it !
“ did you think of walking down to walworth ?
but she seemed to be everywhere .
” said mr drummle .
as the six evenings had dwindled away , to five , to four , to three , to two , i had become more and more appreciative of the society of joe and biddy .
let me introduce the topic , handel , by mentioning that in london it is not the custom to put the knife in the mouth , for fear of accidents , and that while the fork is reserved for that use , it is not put further in than necessary .
so , i nodded , and then he nodded again , and made room on the settle beside him that i might sit down there .
it’s not worth discussing .
she asked this question , still without looking at me , but in an unwonted tone of sympathy .
“ i’m a heavy grubber , dear boy , ” he said , as a polite kind of apology when he made an end of his meal , “ but i always was .
i persuaded myself that i knew he was taken ;
when we gradually fell into keeping late hours and late company , i noticed that he looked about him with a desponding eye at breakfast-time ;
“ well , pip , you know , ” replied joe , as if that were a little unreasonable , “ you yourself see me put ’em in my ’at , and therefore you know as they are here .
i shall do well enough , and so will my husband .
with those words the impostor shook them both by the hand , with an air , and left the house ;
that the fact had occurred , and i had a mysterious knowledge of it .
“ good-bye , pip !
sarah pocket and georgiana contended who should remain last ;
as wemmick and miss skiffins sat side by side , and as i sat in a shadowy corner , i observed a slow and gradual elongation of mr wemmick’s mouth , powerfully suggestive of his slowly and gradually stealing his arm round miss skiffins’s waist .
i begged wemmick , in conclusion , to understand that my help must always be rendered without herbert’s knowledge or suspicion , and that there was no one else in the world with whom i could advise .
if you’d have the condethenthun to be bought off from the t’other thide at hany thuperior prithe !
i thought that with her i could have been happy there for life .
there is but one way that i know of .
yah , bounceable !
he was not to come down till he saw us .
“ are you quite sure , then , that you will come to see him often ?
a lord ?
as a matter of course , they fawned upon me in my prosperity with the basest meanness .
and when i say that i am going away within the hour , for i am soon going abroad , and that i shall never rest until i have worked for the money with which you have kept me out of prison , and have sent it to you , don’t think , dear joe and biddy , that if i could repay it a thousand times over , i suppose i could cancel a farthing of the debt i owe you , or that i would do so if i could !
“ but the thing is , ” said herbert pocket , “ that you look about you .
“ ay , pip , ” replied miss havisham , steadily nodding her head ;
” he cried , laughing , after doing it again , “ the burnt child dreads the fire !
for , though it includes what i proceed to add , all the merit of what i proceed to add was joe’s .
the murdered woman , more a match for the man , certainly , in point of years was found dead in a barn near hounslow heath .
“ but what , ” said mr jaggers , swinging his purse , “ what if it was in my instructions to make you a present , as compensation ?
none but my official sentiments can be taken in this office .
they come here on the day , but they dare not refer to it .
you will show yourself to us ;
and as mr pumblechook was very positive and drove his own chaise-cart over everybody it was agreed that it must be so .
chapter ix .
mr pumblechook winked assent ;
and when we’re sentenced , ain’t it him as gets seven year , and me fourteen , and ain’t it him as the judge is sorry for , because he might a done so well , and ain’t it me as the judge perceives to be a old offender of wiolent passion , likely to come to worse ?
three of ’em ;
being here presently denounced , he had for a time succeeded in evading the officers of justice , but being at length seized while in the act of flight , he had resisted them , and had he best knew whether by express design , or in the blindness of his hardihood caused the death of his denouncer , to whom his whole career was known .
now , you shall see me walk back by myself .
old orlick felt that the situation admitted of nothing less than coming on , and was on his defence straightway ;
a gentle pressure on my hand .
and its disappointments , dangers , disgraces , consequences of all kinds , rushed in in such a multitude that i was borne down by them and had to struggle for every breath i drew .
but we didn’t find that it come up to its likeness in the red bills at the shop doors ;
the recorder’s report is made to-day , and he is sure to be executed on monday .
you mustn’t give me credit for the tablecloth and spoons and castors , because they come for you from the coffee-house .
at last , one day , i took courage , and said , “ is it joe ?
mr pumblechook was coming in also , when she stopped him with the gate .
again i thanked him and apologised , and again he said in the cheerfullest manner , “ not at all , i am sure !
“ well then , as to old orlick , he’s a-going up town , ” retorted that worthy .
” said he .
“ i am not sure that i shouldn’t like to see her again , but i should like to go home now .
he knowed that finger when he saw joseph , and he saw it plain .
as the days wore on , and no ill news came , as the day closed in and darkness fell , my overshadowing dread of being disabled by illness before to-morrow morning altogether mastered me .
“ massive ?
” the noble boy in the ancestral boots was inconsistent , representing himself , as it were in one breath , as an able seaman , a strolling actor , a grave-digger , a clergyman , and a person of the utmost importance at a court fencing-match , on the authority of whose practised eye and nice discrimination the finest strokes were judged .
” cried my sister , in amazement .
as we looked full at one another , i felt my breath come quicker in my strong desire to get something out of him .
“ i hope you have done well ?
he took out his black pipe and was going to fill it with negro-head , when , looking at the tangle of tobacco in his hand , he seemed to think it might perplex the thread of his narrative .
“ not so long as that , ” said i .
the hue and cry going off to the hulks , and people coming thence to examine the iron , joe’s opinion was corroborated .
“ i understand it to do so .
i could ha’ got clear of these death-cold flats likewise look at my leg :
i could see none , i could hear none .
neither , beyond the blowing out of the candle , which stood on a table between the door and my sister , and was behind her when she stood facing the fire and was struck , was there any disarrangement of the kitchen , excepting such as she herself had made , in falling and bleeding .
it seemed to me that we continued thus for a long time .
mr jaggers presided , estella sat opposite to him , i faced my green and yellow friend .
“ you was saying , ” said the strange man , turning to joe , “ that you was a blacksmith .
which i meantersay as sech if you’re a man , come on !
“ i want to know , ” said i , “ and particularly , herbert , whether he told you when this happened ?
“ well , herbert ?
in his heat and triumph , and in his knowledge that i had been nearly fainting , he did not remark on my reception of all this .
no , he believed not .
having his hand in , mr wopsle finished off with a most terrifically snarling passage from richard the third , and seemed to think he had done quite enough to account for it when he added , “ as the poet says .
chapter xvi .
it was you as always give old orlick a bad name to her .
i reply , that depends on the original wildness of the beast , and the amount of taming .
but our ways are different ways , none the less .
so i said i would go into the outer office and talk to wemmick .
the more youthful and vigorous part of the community making dashes now and then to cut us off , and lying in wait to intercept us at points of vantage .
at length it had come into my head that the sign looked like a hammer , and on my lustily calling that word in my sister’s ear , she had begun to hammer on the table and had expressed a qualified assent .
and he looked as like a river-pilot as my heart could have wished .
he was arranging his fruit in plates while we talked , which divided his attention , and was the cause of his having made this lapse of a word .
now with encouragement , now with discouragement , now almost flattering him , now openly despising him , now knowing him very well , now scarcely remembering who he was .
“ this is a pretty pleasure-ground , sir .
and , dear sir , what have been betwixt us have been .
our breakfast was as good as the supper , and at half-past eight precisely we started for little britain .
” cried miss havisham , bitterly ;
surely a curious thing .
it was very dark , very wet , very muddy , and so we splashed along .
this description must be received with a week-day limitation .
i wish matthew could have that comfort , but he sets it at defiance .
but there was nothing to be done , saving to communicate to wemmick what i had that night found out , and to remind him that we waited for his hint .
and when he had signed his name , and had removed a finishing blot from the paper to the crown of his head with his two forefingers , he got up and hovered about the table , trying the effect of his performance from various points of view , as it lay there , with unbounded satisfaction .
and when he went to the jolly bargemen to eat his dinner , or went away at night , he would slouch out , like cain or the wandering jew , as if he had no idea where he was going and no intention of ever coming back .
if it should be a question of intellect , he certainly will not .
in the terror of seeing the figure , and in the terror of being certain that it had not been there a moment before , i at first ran from it , and then ran towards it .
” demanded wemmick , quite savagely .
” said biddy , shaking her head with a sorrowful air .
when the sessions came round , mr jaggers caused an application to be made for the postponement of his trial until the following sessions .
he was not disposed to be passive or resigned , as i understood it ;
any foreign steamer that fell in our way and would take us up would do .
he considered the chambers and his own lodging as temporary residences , and advised me to look out at once for a “ fashionable crib ” near hyde park , in which he could have “ a shake-down .
“ with you .
“ then you can go about your work , mary anne , ” said wemmick to the little servant ;
“ and you have , and are bound to have , that tenderness for the life he has risked on your account , that you must save him , if possible , from throwing it away .
you are right , young man .
“ but i must say more .
“ but dear biddy , how smart you are !
i expect you’ll have an invitation to-morrow .
“ and in his last breath reproached me for stooping to a boor !
” and began dancing backwards and forwards in a manner quite unparalleled within my limited experience .
my involuntary start occasioned her to lay her hand upon my arm .
it was old london bridge in those days , and at certain states of the tide there was a race and fall of water there which gave it a bad reputation .
as if it were an absolute point of good breeding that it should tumble off again soon .
would you like to see ’em ?
after an interval of suspense on my part that was quite enthralling and almost painful , i saw his hand appear on the other side of miss skiffins .
could you commission any friend of yours to bring me a pair , if you’ve no further use for ’em ?
“ no , indeed .
and i know what that is to do , though i can’t say i’ve exactly done it .
i took him , and giv’ him up ;
i seem to have been gone a twelvemonth !
smiling as he did so , with a relish and not merely mechanically .
i dare say i should have felt a pain in my liver , too , if i had known where it was .
so , without so much as pulling off their singed and burnt aprons , they went at one another , like two giants .
“ this is an ignorant , determined man , who has long had one fixed idea .
mr wopsle had in his hand the affecting tragedy of george barnwell , in which he had that moment invested sixpence , with the view of heaping every word of it on the head of pumblechook , with whom he was going to drink tea .
secondly .
“ consequence , my mother and me we ran away from my father several times ;
the window indicated was the office window .
and all i can say for my gasping and procrastinating conduct on the fatal morning , is , that it was worthy of the general feebleness of my character .
we all three went to it , behind the wire blind , and presently saw the client go by in an accidental manner , with a murderous-looking tall individual , in a short suit of white linen and a paper cap .
not long before , i had read in the newspapers , how a gentleman unknown had come to the hummums in the night , and had gone to bed , and had destroyed himself , and had been found in the morning weltering in blood .
but i lived happily with herbert and his wife , and lived frugally , and paid my debts , and maintained a constant correspondence with biddy and joe .
“ well , mas’r jaggers , ” said mike , wiping his nose on his fur cap this time ;
the passage was a long one , and seemed to pervade the whole square basement of the manor house .
that she made herself winning , and would have won me even if the task had needed pains .
don’t you , dear boy ?
the galley was kept steady , and the silent , eager look-out at the water was resumed .
escaped .
” then both voices would seem to be stifled in a struggle , and then would break out again .
“ true .
as to the result , it’s a toss-up .
the clerk and clergyman then appearing , we were ranged in order at those fatal rails .
when i had exhausted the garden and a greenhouse with nothing in it but a fallen-down grape-vine and some bottles , i found myself in the dismal corner upon which i had looked out of the window .
provis was to be strictly careful while i was gone , and herbert was to take the charge of him that i had taken .
“ am i insulting ?
“ halloa !
my bedstead , divested of its curtains , had been removed , with me upon it , into the sitting-room , as the airiest and largest , and the carpet had been taken away , and the room kept always fresh and wholesome night and day .
good night , pip .
“ i heard , miss havisham , ” said i , rather at a loss , “ that you were so kind as to wish me to come and see you , and i came directly .
mrs pocket read all the time , and i was curious to know what the book could be .
during the whole interval , whenever i went to the bottom of the staircase , i heard her footstep , saw her light pass above , and heard her ceaseless low cry .
and the man we have in hiding down the river , is estella’s father .
i fancied that i could detect in his manner a consciousness of this , and a purpose of always holding her in suspense .
“ halloa , mr pip , ” said he ;
far out of reach ;
i was greatly dejected and distressed , but in an incoherent wholesale sort of way .
casting my eyes on mr wemmick as we went along , to see what he was like in the light of day , i found him to be a dry man , rather short in stature , with a square wooden face , whose expression seemed to have been imperfectly chipped out with a dull-edged chisel .
because when i come in from the forge of a night , any one can see me turning to at it .
a stronger pressure on my hand .
me , and mr wopsle , and pip .
i then found that wemmick was the clerk in the next room .
let’s have a wedding .
“ there was a conwict off last night , ” said joe , aloud , “ after sunset-gun .
yet this again increased my restlessness .
fantastic failures of journeys occupied me until the day dawned and the birds were singing .
” here , he dodged backwards and forwards , and did all sorts of things while i looked helplessly at him .
in brief , joe thought that if i thought well of it , he thought well of it .
all the work , near and afar , that tended to the end , had been accomplished ;
” but i doubt if they had more meaning in them than an election cry , and i cannot suggest a darker picture of her state of mind .
“ for the temple , i think , ” said i .
“ who am i , ” cried miss havisham , striking her stick upon the floor and flashing into wrath so suddenly that estella glanced up at her in surprise , “ who am i , for god’s sake , that i should be kind ?
i could see nothing of the room except the shining of the fire in the window-glass , but i stiffened in all my joints with the consciousness that i was under close inspection .
which the waiter staggered in with , expressing in his countenance burden and suffering .
i walked no further than the gate of the gardens , and then pretended to be weaker than i was , and asked joe for his arm .
it was the only good thing i had done , and the only completed thing i had done , since i was first apprised of my great expectations .
that i got them off , closed with her , threw her down , and got them over her ;
the old man , following my eyes , cried with great triumph , “ my son’s come home !
on the monday morning at a quarter before nine , herbert went to the counting-house to report himself , to look about him , too , i suppose , and i bore him company .
i put such questions to mr wopsle as , when did the man come in ?
you goes out of his way this present night .
by these conditions i promised to abide .
as it stood open , and as i knew that estella had let the visitors out , for she had returned with the keys in her hand , i strolled into the garden , and strolled all over it .
we agreed that it should be carried into execution , and that provis should never recognise us if we came below bridge , and rowed past mill pond bank .
“ no , joseph , ” said my sister , still in a reproachful manner , while joe apologetically drew the back of his hand across and across his nose , “ you do not yet though you may not think it know the case .
“ you know that i am always with him to the full extent of the time allowed , and that i should be with him all day long , if i could .
” i have never been absolutely certain whether i uttered a shrill yell of terror , merely in spirit , or in the bodily hearing of the company .
“ ay , i s’pose i think so , dear boy .
“ pip , how air you , pip ?
this is our sitting-room , just such chairs and tables and carpet and so forth , you see , as they could spare from home .
but , i had already considered that such a course , by detaining us there , or binding us to come back , might be fatal to provis .
our conference was held in the state parlour , which was feebly lighted by one candle .
i might have thought it was all lies together , only as the birds’ names come out true , i supposed mine did .
and at the rate of that handsome sum of money per annum , and at no higher rate , you are to live until the donor of the whole appears .
i am ignorant what may become of me very soon , how poor i may be , or where i may go .
he was perpetually pegging at the floor the moment she left his sight .
“ i say .
the third , his bedroom .
” and so on .
“ estella !
not that that implies familiar intercourse between them , for he is a bad courtier and will not propitiate her .
“ i suspect that stuff’s of your providing .
except that he had not the same face , and had a flat broad-brimmed low-crowned felt hat on .
“ no i am not , ” said biddy , looking up and laughing .
sowed ’em , to come up small salad .
it is not much to the purpose whether a gate in that garden wall which i had scrambled up to peep over on the last occasion was , on that last occasion , open or shut .
and yet i went on against trust and against hope .
he took it , and went out , and presently the stinger went off with a bang that shook the crazy little box of a cottage as if it must fall to pieces , and made every glass and teacup in it ring .
he touched one of the bottles without looking at it or speaking , and i made him some hot rum and water .
because of pip’s account of him , the said matthew .’ i am told by biddy , that air the writing , ” said joe , repeating the legal turn as if it did him infinite good , “ account of him the said matthew .’ and a cool four thousand , pip !
they may not be worth much , but , after all , they’re property and portable .
asks another question of the subordinate before his first is dry !
“ that’s the state of the case , for that much i’ve seen myself .
whether there had been a closed iron furnace in a dark corner of the room , and a voice had called out , over and over again , that miss havisham was consuming within it , these were things that i tried to settle with myself and get into some order , as i lay that morning on my bed .
you know that what is said between you and me goes no further .
mr wopsle shut his eyes , and opened them again ;
and uncle pumblechook (joe’s uncle , but mrs joe appropriated him) , who was a well-to-do cornchandler in the nearest town , and drove his own chaise-cart .
while i was considering that some one must have been there lately and must soon be coming back , or the candle would not be burning , it came into my head to look if the wick were long .
for , it inscrutably appeared to stand to reason , in the minds of the whole company , that i was an excrescence on the entertainment .
at all events , you’ll be nearer getting it , for it must come at last .
i execute my instructions , and i am paid for doing so .
” but he didn’t .
and it gained its point after all , for i saw it through the window within a few minutes , being nursed by little jane .
“ stay !
“ i am as sure of that , wemmick , as you can be , and i thank you most earnestly for all your interest and friendship .
as we walked to and fro , all four together , before breakfast , i deemed it right to recount what i had seen .
“ i have not leisure to think of that , ” said i .
she might have been some two or three years younger than wemmick , and i judged her to stand possessed of portable property .
again our charge was the least anxious of the party .
“ miss havisham , ” i said , when her cry had died away , “ you may dismiss me from your mind and conscience .
“ yes , joe ;
these crawling things had fascinated my attention , and i was watching them from a distance , when miss havisham laid a hand upon my shoulder .
something came into my head which induced me to run after him , as he was going down to the jolly bargemen , where he had left a hired carriage .
this changed the subject in an instant , and made us hurriedly resolve to go to the play .
“ don’t take it that way , or you’ll get its head under the table .
“ a dog ?
in the excited and exalted state of my brain , i could not think of a place without seeing it , or of persons without seeing them .
” as he shook his heavy hand at me , with his mouth snarling like a tiger’s , i felt that it was true .
then i told him all i knew , and how i knew it ;
“ put the case , pip , that passion and the terror of death had a little shaken the woman’s intellects , and that when she was set at liberty , she was scared out of the ways of the world , and went to him to be sheltered .
“ well , ” retorted drummle ;
“ the lonely church , right out on the marshes , with graves round it !
in the room where the dressing-table stood , and where the wax-candles burnt on the wall , i found miss havisham and estella ;
when the church came to itself , for he was so sudden and strong that he made it go head over heels before me , and i saw the steeple under my feet , when the church came to itself , i say , i was seated on a high tombstone , trembling while he ate the bread ravenously .
it was , little britain , and he had written after it on his card , “ just out of smithfield , and close by the coach-office .
“ do you know where mr matthew pocket lives ?
finding such clerk on wemmick’s post that morning , i knew what was going on ;
“ they had better be wiser , than well .
i took what joe gave me , and found it to be the crumpled play-bill of a small metropolitan theatre , announcing the first appearance , in that very week , of “ the celebrated provincial amateur of roscian renown , whose unique performance in the highest tragic walk of our national bard has lately occasioned so great a sensation in local dramatic circles .
“ estella waved a blue flag , and i waved a red one , and miss havisham waved one sprinkled all over with little gold stars , out at the coach-window .
he’d have all he could get .
” cried miss havisham , passionately striking her stick upon the floor ;
“ he was puzzled what to do ;
but they only referred to it when i did .
“ what does this fellow want ?
in the evening there was rowing on the river .
” replied the landlord .
instead of being transfixed , herbert replied in an easy matter-of-course way , “ exactly .
in watching his face , i made quite a firework of the aged’s sausage , and greatly discomposed both my own attention and wemmick’s ;
i was haunted by the fear that she would , sooner or later , find me out , with a black face and hands , doing the coarsest part of my work , and would exult over me and despise me .
here i am .
without evincing any inclination to come in again , he there delivered his valedictory remarks .
at once i put bills up in the windows ;
i think i recollect though , that you read with his father ?
“ ah !
such things as could be said for him were said , how he had taken to industrious habits , and had thriven lawfully and reputably .
“ how could i , ” he returned , forced to the admission , “ when i never see her in my life ?
i knew what she meant , but ever did his duty in his way of life , with a strong hand , a quiet tongue , and a gentle heart .
“ six months , a year !
then , he took a live coal from the fire with the tongs , and lighted his pipe at it , and then turned round on the hearth-rug with his back to the fire , and went through his favourite action of holding out both his hands for mine .
” and the moment he said that , the stranger turned his head and looked at me .
i adopted her , to be loved .
” and no more .
it was pleasant and quiet , out there with the sails on the river passing beyond the earthwork , and sometimes , when the tide was low , looking as if they belonged to sunken ships that were still sailing on at the bottom of the water .
“ you will find your credit good , mr pip , ” said my guardian , whose flask of sherry smelt like a whole caskful , as he hastily refreshed himself , “ but i shall by this means be able to check your bills , and to pull you up if i find you outrunning the constable .
“ i am sorry for that ;
i’ll look him up and go to work for you .
the cleared space had been enclosed with a rough fence , and looking over it , i saw that some of the old ivy had struck root anew , and was growing green on low quiet mounds of ruin .
there are only two ;
so that , if a light had been burning at each point that night , there would have been a long strip of the blank horizon between the two bright specks .
the jack at the ship was instructed where the drowned man had gone down , and undertook to search for the body in the places where it was likeliest to come ashore .
on our arrival in denmark , we found the king and queen of that country elevated in two arm-chairs on a kitchen-table , holding a court .
i told you so .
no favouring in this shop .
chapter ii .
little jane is the same .
“ ah , poor thing !
now , concerning the influence of my position on others , i was in no such difficulty , and so i perceived though dimly enough perhaps that it was not beneficial to anybody , and , above all , that it was not beneficial to herbert .
miss havisham had settled down , i hardly knew how , upon the floor , among the faded bridal relics with which it was strewn .
the longer the silence lasted , the more unable i felt to speak .
i began explaining to her that secret history of the partnership .
“ well , i don’t know , ” returned joe .
“ my dear joe , ” i cried , in desperation , taking hold of his coat , “ don’t go on in that way .
i’ll put your body in the kiln , i’d carry two such to it , on my shoulders and , let people suppose what they may of you , they shall never know nothing .
“ no , ” returned wemmick .
mr drummle looked at me , and then at my boots , and then said , “ oh !
in vain should i attempt to describe the astonishment and disquiet of herbert , when he and i and provis sat down before the fire , and i recounted the whole of the secret .
” returned the sergeant , “ two .
it was easy to make sure that as yet he knew me no more than if he had never seen me in his life .
and i envied her little lover , in spite of his being subject to flopson .
his ignorance , poor fellow , at last served him ;
no objection was made to my getting close to the dock , on the outside of it , and holding the hand that he stretched forth to me .
i woke , too , to recover the fear which i had lost in the night , of his being found out as a returned transport .
“ mr trabb , ” said i , “ it’s an unpleasant thing to have to mention , because it looks like boasting ;
” this unexpected inquiry put me into such a difficulty that i began saying in the absurdest way that if there had been any such person i had no doubt she would have been quite well and would have been very much obliged and would have sent her compliments , when the nurse came to my rescue .
it never did run out , however , but was brought to a premature end , as i proceed to relate .
this guileless confectioner was not by any means sober , and had a black eye in the green stage of recovery , which was painted over .
i held her hand to my lips some lingering moments , and so i left her .
a man would die to-night of lying out on the marshes , i thought .
“ is she ?
“ us two being now alone , ” resumed joe , “ and me having the intentions and abilities to stay not many minutes more , i will now conclude leastways begin to mention what have led to my having had the present honour .
added to these were the influences of his subsequent branded life among men , and , crowning all , his consciousness that he was dodging and hiding now .
it had been his own idea to wear that touch of powder , and i had conceded the powder after overcoming the shorts .
no other company was in the house than the landlord , his wife , and a grizzled male creature , the “ jack ” of the little causeway , who was as slimy and smeary as if he had been low-water mark too .
“ yes , dear joe , steadily .
but not only that , ” said wemmick , “ she went into his service immediately after her acquittal , tamed as she is now .
then opened the door to look out into the passages , and cheer myself with the companionship of a distant light , near which i knew the chamberlain to be dozing .
i lighted my fire , which burnt with a raw pale flare at that time of the morning , and fell into a doze before it .
” said i , half suspecting him to be mad .
“ because , look’ee here , dear boy , ” he said , dropping his voice , and laying a long finger on my breast in an impressive manner , “ caution is necessary .
after groping about for a little , he found the flint and steel he wanted , and began to strike a light .
” another roar , with a prolonged shake at the end .
then the judge addressed them .
it was the subject of the only determined resistance i made in all the wretched years .
” there was a red-eyed little jew who came into the close while i was loitering there , in company with a second little jew whom he sent upon an errand ;
” said she to joe .
the allotted time ran out , while we were thus ;
