“ unless the young man considers that he knows me already .
he opened his lips to deliver it , and a stream of red came out between them and trickled down his unshaven chin .
“ in this not in other things we men are ahead .
like every true performer , she was intoxicated by the mere feel of the notes :
however , we got talking , and they refreshed me not a little .
“ yes , they are , ” said cecil .
” freddy whispered .
lucy recollected herself .
“ i can’t see the point of it myself .
pray , does that satisfy you ?
“ also that men fall into two classes those who forget views and those who remember them , even in small rooms .
you can go if the miss alans will have you .
“ no !
he alone had played skilfully , using the whole of his instinct , while the others had used scraps of their intelligence .
try the faults of miss honeychurch ;
” said miss lavish , her ardour visibly decreasing .
he said , “ steady on !
i’m done .
“ one comes for life .
she gave two or three sighs , for the stooping posture hurt her back , and , for all her diplomacy , she felt that she was growing old .
taking up baedeker’s handbook to northern italy , she committed to memory the most important dates of florentine history .
pull out from the depths those thoughts that you do not understand , and spread them out in the sunlight and know the meaning of them .
“ you kiss me .
don’t apologize to me .
only three english people knew of it in the world .
already at rome he had hinted to her that they might be suitable for each other .
italian servants ;
freddy doesn’t even know the name of the people he pretends have taken it instead .
“ in the course of conversation they said that they wanted a country cottage the father to live there , the son to run down for week-ends .
you have scarcely been home three months .
“ of course i do .
“ next week , i gather .
“ i don’t see any difference .
miss bartlett was silent .
i shall tell them then .
as well this ending to his day as any .
whatever is there to shout over ?
i wish he hadn’t but if we act the truth , the people who really love us are sure to come back to us in the long run .
“ well , if they are coming no , minnie , not saturn .
the sun , though it had moved a little since the morning , would never be hidden behind the western hills .
“ shameful !
” and there was an irruption from the house on to the terrace .
but now that the hood was down , she did see something that she would have missed there were no lights in the windows of cissie villa , and round the garden gate she fancied she saw a padlock .
but not in that way .
miss bartlett approached .
now beauty and passion seem never to have existed .
well , at all events , she must not tell lies .
the name of our house is windy corner .
eluding her cousin’s caress , she led the way downstairs .
but he is his mother’s son .
the girl was stubborn .
freddy followed , nodding to the clergyman , whom he trusted not to be pulling one’s leg , really .
indeed , he no longer alarmed her at all ;
granted that they wished to misbehave , it was pleasant for them to be able to do so .
they must go to prato .
“ the emersons have been so nice .
“ what does it mean ?
“ no harm , of course .
i am not to talk .
“ our performer has changed her mind , ” said miss bartlett , perhaps implying , she will play the music to mr emerson .
“ after you left florence horrible .
beware of muddle .
she said to cecil , “ i am not coming in to tea tell mother i must write some letters , ” and went up to her room .
the ladies move , mr beebe moves , george moves , and movement may engender shadow .
“ that’s all right , ” he said kindly .
ever since that last evening at florence she had deemed it unwise to reveal her soul .
“ the emersons who were at florence , do you mean ?
i have something to say to you .
emerson .
for he believed that women revere men for their manliness .
“ emerson .
“ they have taken cissie villa .
“ what are we to do with him ?
in the distance she saw creatures with black hoods , such as appear in dreams .
his manner was somewhat unfortunate .
playing bumble-puppy with minnie beebe , niece to the rector , and aged thirteen an ancient and most honourable game , which consists in striking tennis-balls high into the air , so that they fall over the net and immoderately bounce ;
there was only that one fire .
“ cecil , give me that sovereign .
“ apooshoo , kouf .
then we took the house here , and he goes bathing with your brother , and became better .
“ nor me .
“ afar off the towers of florence , while the bank on which she sat was carpeted with violets .
by the time lucy was ready her cousin had done her breakfast , and was listening to the clever lady among the crumbs .
“ oh , but your son wants employment .
i know that lucy likes your son , because she tells me everything .
she was silent .
he observed her brow , and the sudden strength of her lips .
“ san miniato .
he approached , his face in the shadow .
the beggars worried her , the dust blew in her eyes , and she remembered that a young girl ought not to loiter in public places .
does she still live rent free , as she did in her nephew’s time ?
“ they’re nice people , the vyses .
“ oh , cecil how you made me jump !
it was worth while ;
peter’s .
” the darkness was coming on , and he felt that this odd woman really did know .
“ oh , yes , ” he grumbled .
but it was transfigured by the view beyond , for windy corner was built on the range that overlooks the sussex weald .
not books that you can talk about afterwards .
though you fly to greece , and never see him again , or forget his very name , george will work in your thoughts till you die .
he would find miss minnie down in the garden .
“ the sort that can know no one intimately .’ it is true .
and she developed it at great length , while cecil yawned and freddy played at “ this year , next year , now , never , ” with his plum-stones , and lucy artfully fed the flames of her mother’s wrath .
mr beebe considered .
“ my dear , ” said the old man gently , “ i think that you are repeating what you have heard older people say .
“ there was an old man at the bertolini whom he said had murdered his wife .
it was resumed broken , not marching once from the cradle to the grave .
“ our landlord was told that we should be a different type of person , ” said george , who seemed disposed to carry the matter further .
“ cecil ?
some hit mrs honeychurch ;
perhaps there never is such a contest .
honeychurch ,’ ” freddy was an indifferent mimic “ ahem !
italians drive them .
“ may me and lucy get down from our chairs ?
“ of course i will , ” said lucy , twisting up her other hand in the curtains .
” she struck at her playfully .
“ he will never forgive us i mean , he will never be interested in us again .
“ i’m caught in the tangle .
would not she intercede ?
even if my dress is thinner it will not show so much , being brown .
there was a fitting silence when miss lavish had concluded .
“ i can’t remember why .
under the rug , lucy felt the kindly pressure of her cousin’s hand .
we return to the pension bertolini .
would you and miss honeychurch be disposed to join me in a drive some day this week a drive in the hills ?
“ lucy , i want to ask something of you that i have never asked before .
he was inclined to be frightened , but his wife accepted the situation without either pride or humility .
lucy would rather like to go out , as it was her first day in florence , but , of course , she could go alone .
she was seized with an impulse to destroy it , but fortunately remembered that she had no right to do so , since it must be the property of young mr emerson .
not that she saw anything of them now .
“ especially as he has gone under , ” he said quietly .
mr beebe thought he was not .
“ never again shall eleanor lavish be a friend of mine .
scarcely the adjective for those noble beings !
“ sir harry !
it is the first thing that i remember .
oh , one oughtn’t to laugh , really .
“ so am i , ” said freddy .
“ stop !
“ hi !
“ i know but it seems so odd , so unlike her , so i was going to say selfish .
and , equally of course , she felt sure that she would prove a nuisance , and begged to be given an inferior spare room something with no view , anything .
puncturing her tire near summer street , and it being mended while she sat very woebegone in that pretty churchyard , she saw to her astonishment , a door open opposite and the younger emerson man come out .
as he approached her he found time to wish that he could recoil .
not the body , but of the body .
an engagement is so potent a thing that sooner or later it reduces all who speak of it to this state of cheerful awe .
i can’t run at you , you know .
she could protest sincerely against miss bartlett’s insinuations .
“ let me see a sovereign’s worth of silver .
“ i am very sorry for that , ” said mr beebe with feeling .
and so cheerful through it all !
a shropshire lad .
at present she has none .
but the two young men were delirious .
most certainly they will go to constantinople .
“ oh , i thought they had been libelling me to you .
” he gave a nervous gulp .
she must some day believe in herself .
that is out of the question .
indeed , who would have supposed that tolerance , sympathy , and a sense of humour would inhabit that militant form ?
“ niente , ” said the italian lady , and returned to her prayers .
she hurried up the garden , still flushed with shame .
how right is signora bertolini , who exclaimed to me the other day :
after many conquests we shall attain simplicity .
“ oh , not italy , but constantinople .
she knew that the intruder was ill-bred , even before she glanced at him .
she was drifting away from her mother .
to bring on the crisis , she said :
oh , dear !
“ fifty miles of spring , and we’ve come up to admire them .
go away !
he was a boy after all .
“ it is my fault , it is a disaster .
it’s your old idea , the idea that has kept europe back i mean the idea that women are always thinking of men .
“ how you do remind me of charlotte bartlett !
lucy compromised :
you despise my mother i know you do because she’s conventional and bothers over puddings ;
“ leonora , ” said miss lavish ;
above all , it should never ask for leave where there is a right of way .
i don’t know what the world’s coming to .
they refused him .
the son , who took every little contretemps as if it were a tragedy , was listening also .
“ i die for it !
he was dozing by the study fire , and he opened his eyes , and there was miss bartlett .
i have thought before speaking ;
that was all .
murder , accusations of murder , a lady clinging to one man and being rude to another were these the daily incidents of her streets ?
no one will ever know .
miss bartlett burst into self-accusations and regrets .
they filled italy , they were even usurping the places she had known as a child .
but is there an english church ?
she felt a little calmer then , and bought fra angelico’s “ coronation , ” giotto’s “ ascension of st .
“ oh , delightful !
“ we shan’t have rain , but we shall have darkness , so let us hurry on .
her very words .
he had at once started on friendly relations , owing to lucy’s praise of him in her letters from florence .
then we shall have her heroically good , heroically bad too heroic , perhaps , to be good or bad .
no , i want to be really truthful .
” the clergyman inquired .
and lucy she knew not why wished that the trouble could have come at any other time .
“ i counted on you two keeping each other company .
they shook hands with the clergyman , but did not speak .
george emerson has improved enormously .
“ i suppose anne never told them you were here .
” said the man to lucy , when the display had ceased .
tears came into her mother’s eyes .
and now i want my tea .
isn’t it jolly ?
“ not yet .
a rector lives in a web of petty secrets , and confidences and warnings , and the wiser he is the less he will regard them .
like the little child who ought to have been playing , and who hurt himself upon the tombstone .
i cannot bear it .
but after all , what have we to do with taverns ?
he saw it all .
“ thank you .
so clever my idea of what’s really clever .
” asked miss bartlett .
he would do her no harm by idle gossip ;
they would hand the child her food through the window .
” she cried .
it endeared him to her strangely that he should be sometimes wrong .
ever prone to magnify fate , george counted up the forces that had swept him into this contentment .
“ when i was here for your sake ?
she would really like to do something of which her well-wishers disapproved .
the song of phaethon announced passion requited , love attained .
the sunday after miss bartlett’s arrival was a glorious day , like most of the days of that year .
my dear miss lucy , during our political diatribes we have taken a wrong turning .
gracious what a mess everything is !
“ this way , please , mrs honeychurch , this way .
“ most certainly i would let them be , ” she cried .
how terrible if he did !
without a moment’s doubt , lucy .
she handled her subjects agreeably , and they were , perhaps , more worthy of attention than the high discourse upon guelfs and ghibellines which was proceeding tempestuously at the other end of the room .
lucy , not realizing either , was reduced to literature .
“ admirable .
he did likewise .
“ i say , what about this bathe ?
but her mother was annoyed .
“ it is being young , ” he said quietly , picking up his racquet from the floor and preparing to go .
you will fall .
“ should we go in to tea ?
” murmured george .
her brow was wrinkled , and she still looked furiously cross the result , he concluded , of too much moral gymnastics .
phaethon had lost the game .
who’s the book by ?
and as they frightened her , she had , strangely enough , ceased to respect them .
“ they have gone , then ?
she watched the singular creature pace up and down the chapel .
“ if they are coming , sir harry will let them move in before the twenty-ninth , and he will cross out the clause about whitewashing the ceilings , because it made them nervous , and put in the fair wear and tear one .
an engagement horrid word in the first place is a private matter , and should be treated as such .
it is quite true .
she felt that there was no one whom she might not get to like , that social barriers were irremovable , doubtless , but not particularly high .
wouf !
a certain scheme , from which hitherto he had shrunk , now appeared practical .
any rag , tag , and bobtail apparently does if she can leave her home .
” he exclaimed .
they want the pension keats .
mr eager shut his eyes .
mrs honeychurch left her letter on the writing table and moved towards her young acquaintance .
only you can understand me .
“ how d’ye do ?
she moved across the lawn and smiled in at them , just as if she was going to ask them to play tennis .
away they twinkled into the trees , freddy with a clerical waistcoat under his arm , george with a wide-awake hat on his dripping hair .
and are you fitted to be my husband ?
this sounded very interesting , and lucy hurried over her breakfast , and started with her new friend in high spirits .
“ you have said very little .
there’s enough sorrow in the world , isn’t there , without trying to invent it .
lucy assented .
“ many thanks for your warning .
he expressed his regret .
“ oh , mother , what rubbish you talk !
ignorant of the events of yesterday he was only riding over to get some tea , to see his niece , and to observe whether miss honeychurch saw anything beautiful in the desire of two old ladies to visit athens .
” exclaimed lucy .
he returned to his work .
she followed the maid into the rectory .
” said miss bartlett .
“ his name’s george .
you must have it .
living in delicate seclusion , some in furnished flats , others in renaissance villas on fiesole’s slope , they read , wrote , studied , and exchanged ideas , thus attaining to that intimate knowledge , or rather perception , of florence which is denied to all who carry in their pockets the coupons of cook .
we shall enter it when we no longer despise our bodies .
i think i will go to church , after all .
“ let me finish the story , ” said mr beebe , who had returned .
he was following his own thoughts .
the table recalled mrs honeychurch’s letter .
he turned towards her frowning , as if she had disturbed him in some abstract quest .
from a leonardo she had become a living woman , with mysteries and forces of her own , with qualities that even eluded art .
“ miss bartlett .
the darkness last night was appalling .
“ george , you baby , get up .
he never suggested giving eleanor a cup of tea .
“ ask cecil ;
and the thing one never talked about religion was fading like all the other things .
and when they looked through the hall window , they saw him go up the drive and begin to climb the slopes of withered fern behind the house .
i am used to tunbridge wells , where we are all hopelessly behind the times .
she had been told that this was the only safe way to carry money in italy ;
indeed , she had little more to learn .
“ but ought i not to apologize , at all events , for my apparent rudeness ?
mrs honeychurch left it in .
there was indeed something rather incongruous in lucy’s moral outburst over mr eager .
but she returned to the writing-table , observing , as she passed her son , “ still page 322 ?
“ i don’t know what i think , nor what i want .
george , looking big and dishevelled , was pacing up and down the dining-room .
the feeling was very subtle and quite undogmatic , and he never imparted it to any other of the characters in this entanglement .
after luncheon they asked her to play .
young honeychurch has left a bone in it .
he has been most kind .
“ go to bed at once , dear .
that’s all ;
george emerson still looked at her , but not across anything .
“ observe my foresight .
“ i feel never mind .
soon he detected in her a wonderful reticence .
there was a voice in the wood , in the distance behind them .
“ oh , how like a man !
” and freddy ran away .
” she ran her fingers hysterically through her hair .
he spoke out to make certain “ miss honeychurch , do you remember italy ?
i know nothing about it whatever .
for the air rang with the shrieks of minnie , who was being scalped with a teaspoon .
miss alan did not follow , but gathered that she was being mocked in an agreeable way .
there’s still light enough for another set , if you two’ll hurry .
things must come to a breaking-point some time , and it happens to be to-day .
she could not let this pass , for it was just what she was feeling herself .
we are genteel .
i cannot help thinking that there is something to admire in everyone , even if you do not approve of them .
a gothic statue implies celibacy , just as a greek statue implies fruition , and perhaps this was what mr beebe meant .
“ she came back yesterday .
i want not to be muddled .
miss bartlett was genuinely moved .
“ how do you do ?
she led the way into the whispering pines , and sure enough he did explain before they had gone a dozen yards .
it was hard on the poor chaplain to have his partie carrée thus transformed .
and not until he had inserted an immovable aunt into one of them did sir harry buy .
it’s the tiniest cough , and i have had it three days .
where ?
she found the girl sitting upright with her hand on her cheek .
he said :
“ i see it’s much more than headaches .
i’ve been bother enough to the world by now .
no , it was worse than temper snobbishness .
the result is , they mix up towns , rivers , palaces in one inextricable whirl .
tut !
george sat down where the ground was dry , and drearily unlaced his boots .
“ but why ?
” he said uneasily .
lucy had made no suggestion .
“ oh , how terrible !
summer street lay deep in the woods , and she had stopped where a footpath diverged from the highroad .
“ don’t you like mr beebe ?
she was got up smart , as she phrased it , and she reminded him of some brilliant flower that has no leaves of its own , but blooms abruptly out of a world of green .
“ what would you ask us ?
“ signorina !
the other carriage had drawn up behind , and sensible mr beebe called out that after this warning the couple would be sure to behave themselves properly .
“ or did she mean it ?
“ that’s all right .
“ yes , charlotte , i don’t want you do go ;
“ she is playing again , ” he said to miss bartlett .
when mr emerson forgot himself on the mountain , you made me promise not to tell mother , because you said she would blame you for not being always with me .
“ i fancy they know how to read a rare accomplishment .
“ why will he look at that fresco ?
it’s much too public .
“ of course i want to live at home ;
“ i promised you i shouldn’t .
a dante of the same material ;
freddy , to whom she had been singing , reclined on the floor with his head against her , and an unlit pipe between his lips .
now for the garden .
once back in the town , he and his insight and his knowledge would trouble english ladies no more .
“ i must that is to say , i have to have the pleasure of calling on you later on , my mother says , i hope .
i think myself a very fortunate girl , i assure you .
she must be one of the women whom she had praised so eloquently , who care for liberty and not for men ;
mr beebe , who was hot , and who always acquiesced where possible , looked around him .
from where she knelt , jangling her keys , she could see a slit of darkness , and , peering into it , as if it would tell him that “ little more , ” his long , thoughtful face .
and what would she reply ?
cecil watched them cross the terrace , and descend out of sight by the steps .
summer was retreating .
she spoke of the italian character ;
mr emerson , seeking his son , was told whereabouts to find him .
” she said nervously .
not till then did miss bartlett reply :
um um schopenhauer , nietzsche , and so we go on .
“ buona sera e grazie .
he waited for her to make some remark which should show him her inmost thoughts .
it is too large for the peasant class and too small for any one the least like ourselves .
we either have you in our lives , or leave you to the life that you have chosen .
there is truth .
to take you to it will be a real pleasure .
nature simplest of topics , she thought was around them .
“ h’m !
“ how well did you know them at the bertolini ?
before her lay the rich champaign of tuscany , dotted over with many a smiling village .
you might have warned me in the early stages , before you felt you wouldn’t marry me , and so have given me a chance to improve .
i never could judge behaviour .
generally lucy was depressed at meals .
he did not doubt that she loved his sermon also .
the change will do you good .
“ no , i don’t .
it is hell .
“ don’t you remember that her boiler was to be had out in october , and her bath cistern cleaned out , and all kinds of terrible to-doings ?
oh , thank you !
i had forgotten the emersons have kept more or less in touch .
it might exist for freddy , who still lived and thought straight , but not for one who had deliberately warped the brain .
tea at a renaissance villa , if he had ever meditated it , was now impossible .
so the emersons had gone , and all this bother about greece had been unnecessary .
“ so it will work out right if you give the pound to me .
he built his villas according to his desire ;
miss bartlett assumed her favourite role , that of the prematurely aged martyr .
the dragons have gone , and so have the knights , but still she lingers in our midst .
the other was historical but that she could not start till she had an idea .
“ the point is , we have warred with it .
i feel sure that you will make our dear lucy happy .
“ it will be a push to catch the morning train , but we must try .
and by touch , not by sound alone , did she come to her desire .
the society out of which cecil proposed to rescue lucy was perhaps no very splendid affair , yet it was more splendid than her antecedents entitled her to .
and mr beebe here besides .
“ what height ?
she beheld the horrible fate that overtook three papists two he-babies and a she-baby who began their career by sousing each other with the holy water , and then proceeded to the machiavelli memorial , dripping but hallowed .
no one has the least idea of privacy in this country .
“ thank you .
“ oh , cecil !
lucy rose from the seat .
i cannot say how they came nor whither they go , but we have them , and i see you ruining yours .
let me go my wicked way .
italy is heroic , but greece is godlike or devilish i am not sure which , and in either case absolutely out of our suburban focus .
“ no , dear ;
she was due at the south-eastern station at dorking , whither mrs honeychurch drove to meet her .
“ i hope you gave a careful answer , dear .
solemnly , i thank you for showing me a true woman .
it will accept those whom breeding and intellect and culture have alike rejected .
“ but isn’t it intolerable that a person whom we’re told to imitate should go round spreading slander ?
are you doing the church ?
“ perhaps the road is more sensible , as we’re got up smart .
for that , and for other reasons , he held his peace .
she had behaved splendidly , and he had helped her .
her face was inartistic that of a peevish virago .
” asked his son tranquilly .
” he called , and leant out of the smoking-room window .
to save time , they walked over the green to it , and found father and son smoking in the garden .
there ought to be intermarriage all sorts of things .
“ it isn’t very good , ” she said listlessly .
” said the little lady inquisitively .
“ and you are right , too greece will be all right ;
when mr honeychurch died , he had the satisfaction which few honest solicitors despise of leaving his family rooted in the best society obtainable .
“ oh , cecil !
people will hear you ” ;
we started such friends .
“ all right , dear , ” said mrs honeychurch kindly .
and they murmured that one could not be too careful with a young girl .
it had touched him greatly that she had not broken away at the suggestion .
“ what i mean , ” he continued , “ is that you can have our rooms , and we’ll have yours .
“ drive ?
” laughed miss lavish .
of course , the wish was due to nerves , which love to play such perverse tricks upon us .
“ and he has beautiful manners .
that will be just the proper thing .
“ i know .
she could not carry her request any further .
he would have strolled away if lucy had not stopped him .
what about mr floyd’s ten shillings ?
she must see some beauty in life , or she could not play the piano as she did .
“ generally , ” replied mr eager , “ one has only sympathy for their success .
lucy was standing flowerlike by the water , he rushed up and took her in his arms ;
finally nothing happened ;
“ mr eager and charlotte , dreadful frozen charlotte .
she stopped and leant her elbows against the parapet of the embankment .
beethoven is so usually simple and direct in his appeal that it is sheer perversity to choose a thing like that , which , if anything , disturbs .
“ well ;
he returned , and she talked of the murder .
a manufacturing district , i suppose ?
when i think of you it’s always as in a room .
“ things i didn’t want , ” he said crossly .
” she struck her knees with clenched fists , and repeated :
“ you are merely ridiculous , ” she said quietly .
“ yet freddy ought not to have told even you .
she has learnt you will let me talk freely , as i have begun freely she has learnt what it is to love :
he was trustworthy , intelligent , and even kind ;
it is delightful to advise a newcomer , and he was first in the field .
it really was too bad .
minnie , rushing in where cecil feared to tread , announced that she would play .
the expedition was typical of miss bartlett , who would return cold , tired , hungry , and angelic , with a ruined skirt , a pulpy baedeker , and a tickling cough in her throat .
would not he , the cad , the charlatan , attempt a more dramatic finish ?
byron .
now , this was abominably impertinent , and she ought to have been furious .
but he was sensitive to the successive particles of it which he encountered .
he shouted for support to his son .
mr george emerson .
“ i’ll be down in a minute .
“ i taught him , ” he quavered , “ to trust in love .
” exclaimed mr beebe , mopping his brow .
why couldn’t you couldn’t you have warned me if you felt anything wrong ?
“ not abominably ,’ ” was the gentle correction .
” his voice suggested sympathetic reproof but at the same time indicated that a few harrowing details would not be unacceptable .
this sense of wickedness had been slight at first .
he has always gone in for unconventionality , and parents nowhere , and so forth .
can you tell me ?
minnie !
so ” elaborate irony “ you and the other country families will be able to call in perfect safety .
he saw that the needful fire had been kindled in lucy .
” that melody was blurred by the soft road .
it was of drawing-room people that miss bartlett thought as she journeyed downwards towards the fading sun .
she stopped when he entered .
” exclaimed mrs honeychurch .
i dare say you are right not to .
the old man’s face saddened , and he touched her gently with his hand .
i feel that our tour together is hardly the success i had hoped .
preserve me from people who have seen better days , and bring heirlooms with them that make the house smell stuffy .
i must apologize .
“ no , you don’t !
mr vyse does stop behind in england .
” he shuddered .
it is obvious enough for the reader to conclude , “ she loves young emerson .
you warned me to be careful .
young mr emerson scored a notable triumph to the delight of mr beebe and to the secret delight of lucy .
the things that really mattered were unshaken .
cecil got up ;
” at this moment miss bartlett entered , and her nervousness increased .
she is very proud of that thick hedge .
shoolbred and messrs .
” exploded mr emerson .
“ no .
“ the rent is absurdly low , ” he told them , “ and perhaps i am an easy landlord .
her father , a prosperous local solicitor , had built windy corner , as a speculation at the time the district was opening up , and , falling in love with his own creation , had ended by living there himself .
” asked mrs honeychurch .
she struck her matronly forehead .
” called cecil , for conversation seemed to flag .
” she called .
if i have vexed you it is equally true that i have neglected you .
she thought a moment , and agreed that it did make a difference .
“ because , don’t you see , freddy paid your cab .
” he never realized that it may be an act of kindness in a bad player to make up a fourth .
people pretended he was vulgar , but he certainly wasn’t that .
in height it scarcely exceeded the cottages .
that desideratum would not be omitted .
she saw that for the future she must be more vigilant , and be absolutely truthful ?
“ what old man ?
they were tired , and under the guise of unselfishness they wrangled .
“ call , my lad ?
do you know that you have never once been with me in the fields or the wood since we were engaged ?
lucy had plenty to say in reply .
she must avoid censuring cecil .
he is the sort who are all right so long as they keep to things books , pictures but kill when they come to people .
but lucy , a mortal maid , was disappointed in him .
i simply slipped into those violets .
he’s good , he’s clever , he’s rich , he’s well connected oh , you needn’t kick the piano !
“ how delicate those sonatas are !
i reminded her how the queen had been to ireland when she did not want to go , and i must say she was dumbfounded , and made no reply .
” he beat his palms together in silence ;
she did not answer .
“ i shall miss every ball anyway , so what does it matter ?
“ yes , miss , they have gone .
some one had to be soothed either cecil or miss bartlett or a being not visible to the mortal eye a being who whispered to her soul :
it is i .
no .
the emersons’ need of a housekeeper ;
“ too late to go out , ” said miss alan in a voice of relief .
she smiled gravely .
it was as if one should see the leonardo on the ceiling of the sistine .
the two main facts were clear .
or will she come with us ?
he is young , but i know that his sister’s insult would rouse in him a very lion .
“ you have worried them as much as they can stand .
“ a golden haze ,’ ” he read .
i do hope i haven’t monopolized him .
i trust that the servants know nothing .
” he asked when they were driving home .
this theory , had he known it , had possibly just been illustrated by facts .
“ dear , one moment we may not have this chance for a chat again .
“ yes , yes .
it was at one of those entertainments where the upper classes entertain the lower .
her own exposure had unnerved her , and thoughts were colliding painfully in her brain .
without was poured a sea of radiance ;
they don’t understand our ways .
i had a letter from charlotte while i was away in london .
they trusted me .
“ plenty of society , ” said mrs honeychurch , who was trying to remember the hang of one of the dresses .
but i feel my foot’s in it .
an extra lurch made him turn angrily in his seat .
we must really give the signora a testimonial .
“ one has to go through it , i suppose .
for a moment they realized vast possibilities of good .
good man !
meaningless at first , it gradually became menacing , obnoxious , portentous with evil .
ah , the town !
“ i only wish poets would say this , too :
“ when he insulted you , how would you have replied ?
“ we literary hacks are shameless creatures .
freddy or any one might be outside .
he had been rather a nuisance all through the tennis , for the novel that he was reading was so bad that he was obliged to read it aloud to others .
“ funny girl !
“ oh , cecil , whatever do you mean ?
a good deal of it was unsuitable , but of course one always had to adapt .
“ i’ve come for tea , mr vyse .
i will choose for myself what is ladylike and right .
you’ll be late .
i won’t be stifled , not by the most glorious music , for people are more glorious , and you hide them from me .
whether miss bartlett detected the slip one cannot say , for it is impossible to penetrate into the minds of elderly people .
we are at their mercy .
your mother would never forgive me , lucy .
nothing can hide a petty nature .
then he flattered the clergyman , praised his liberal-mindedness , his enlightened attitude towards philosophy and science .
miss lavish has been bicycling in your parts , but was not sure whether a call would be welcome .
they were both annoyed at her remark and seemed determined to get rid of her .
he was very quiet , and his white face , with its ruddy whiskers , seemed suddenly inhuman .
immediately he realized that of all the conceited , ludicrous , contemptible ways of announcing an engagement this was the worst .
“ yes , i have , ” and sank down as if suddenly weary .
“ minnie , don’t be late .
not so these english .
then mrs honeychurch opened her door and said :
and call it duty when it means that you can’t stand your own home !
“ i seem to bring nothing but misfortune wherever i go .
“ the place is ruined !
“ do not cry , dearest .
minnie was fortunately collecting ferns .
she was silent .
it was then that she saw , pinned up over the washstand , a sheet of paper on which was scrawled an enormous note of interrogation .
gravely displeased , he turned to go .
george ran down-stairs and pushed them into the room without speaking .
one ought to come up to london more not a cheap ticket like to-day , but to stop .
“ but miss lavish has even taken away baedeker .
“ i suspected it was unscholarly .
“ george emerson is all right , and what other source is there ?
how d’ye do ?
“ i have been a failure , ” said miss bartlett , as she struggled with the straps of lucy’s trunk instead of strapping her own .
and oh , the deceit !
i assure you cissie villa’s nothing to me ;
but i suppose one ought to read it as one’s met her .
cecil is teaching lucy italian , and he says her playing is wonderful .
he was the most competent of miss bartlett’s opponents , but infinitely the least dangerous .
perhaps she must have a change .
“ i can just remember us all three going into the country for the day and seeing as far as hindhead .
mr floyd was her partner .
no , lucy , do not stir .
“ oh , well , let it be shop , then .
but for it she would have avoided george emerson successfully .
“ oh , dear miss honeychurch , you will catch a chill !
ah , dear , if i were george , and gave you one kiss , it would make you brave .
she would not enjoy anything till she was safe at rome .
“ goal !
“ there are days when one sees clearly , and this is one of them .
and one person catches it from another .
do you play tennis ?
“ a room ?
“ why , miss honeychurch , why ?
“ i have a feeling that talk is a thing he will never do .
he added :
“ yes , ” said lucy , whom at the time the argument had pleased .
over such trivialities as these many a valuable hour may slip away , and the traveller who has gone to italy to study the tactile values of giotto , or the corruption of the papacy , may return remembering nothing but the blue sky and the men and women who live under it .
lucy and miss bartlett had a certain style about them , and mr beebe , though unreliable , was a man of parts .
from the chair beneath her she extracted a gun-metal cigarette-case , on which were powdered in turquoise the initials “ e .
“ emerson .
they spoke of alessio baldovinetti .
she put out the lamp .
the adventure was over .
it generally did at windy corner .
“ it has happened , ” he repeated , “ and i mean to find out what it is .
i’m not ashamed .
“ yes , but she is purging off the honeychurch taint , most excellent honeychurches , but you know what i mean .
“ if you are to accept a favour it is more suitable you should be under an obligation to his father than to him .
i believe there’s no secret of the human heart into which we wouldn’t pry .
cecil , who had his full share of mediaeval mischievousness , replied that the physique of the lower middle classes was improving at a most appalling rate .
cheerful ?
“ one thing and another , ” said lucy , wondering whether she would get through the meal without a lie .
“ any nook does for me , ” miss bartlett continued ;
his dark , handsome face drooped mournfully towards her to catch her reply .
“ i thought i did at first .
she clasped her knees for the name .
“ dove ?
to gods , to heroes , to the nonsense of school-girls !
it would be death to gossip about mr vyse’s dismissal at the present moment .
they heard him guiding his mother up-stairs .
it was all that one could do .
love felt and returned , love which our bodies exact and our hearts have transfigured , love which is the most real thing that we shall ever meet , reappeared now as the world’s enemy , and she must stifle it .
“ courage , miss honeychurch , courage and faith .
“ he is rather a peculiar man .
“ the emersons won’t hear , and they wouldn’t mind if they did .
“ don’t you think it very plucky of her , mr emerson , to undertake the two miss alans ?
“ isn’t romance capricious !
she is evidently much worried , as , of course , she ought to be .
a true florentine smell !
ah , well , one must have failures .
was that it ?
“ i can’t help it .
he would rather it should fail .
” hissed mr eager .
her calls were returned with enthusiasm , and by the time people found out that she was not exactly of their milieu , they liked her , and it did not seem to matter .
cecil despised their methods perhaps rightly .
“ i say , listen to this , lucy .
two , three , four , six of us no , eight ;
she was upstairs with old mrs beebe , don’t you remember , and then went straight to the church .
certainly the miss alans are a little tiresome , and i’d rather have nice friends of yours .
waste !
“ what things ?
she again desired a struggle , not a discussion .
” he asked .
she has acted loftily and rightly , and it is like her gentle modesty to say that we think too highly of her .
“ yes , miss , ” he replied .
she would not object .
i do hope florence isn’t boring you .
“ my point is that you oughtn’t to have asked charlotte to stop .
” said miss bartlett reproachfully .
how often had lucy rehearsed this bow , this interview !
but lucy ignored the sacred lake and introduced them formally .
“ mr beebe ?
“ i don’t know whether you overheard , but she wants to join the miss alans in their mad career .
“ how are you now ?
but you will question me , though i beg you not to , and i must say something .
there does come my cousin .
” the silence of life had been broken by miss bartlett who stood brown against the view .
“ i’ll get it , ” said the young hostess , rising with decision .
“ i suppose that mr vyse is going with you .
“ how can he be unhappy when he is strong and alive ?
“ then the whole thing runs :
but the greater part are students .
i must apologize for my interference .
i said :
but then , he did not desire to understand it , nor to jump to the conclusion of “ another man ” that would have attracted a grosser mind .
“ cinque lire , ” they had cried , “ cinque lire !
then he took to writing for the socialistic press .
“ it is so tempting to talk to really sympathetic people .
we’re squeezed to death as it is .
it had been forwarded from windy corner .
oh , for your brother !
then she blew into her gloves and said :
“ saturn’s all right for bumble-puppy , ” cried freddy , joining them .
i hope we shall soon emancipate you from baedeker .
“ mr beebe old mr emerson , is he nice or not nice ?
” fired up the other again .
” exclaimed lucy .
he has to build us both up from the beginning again .
italy is just about as much as we can manage .
for a moment he contemplated her , as one who had fallen out of heaven .
servants ;
the water-tight compartments in her will break down , and music and life will mingle .
“ lucy , dearest , let mr beebe eat his dinner .
lucy began to pace up and down the room .
“ that belongs to lavish .
“ and this is the real point you know how silly people are gossiping ladies especially , i am afraid you understand what i mean ?
“ we must think of every possibility .
she was accustomed to have her thoughts confirmed by others or , at all events , contradicted ;
miss bartlett , who was poor at figures , became bewildered and rendered up the sovereign , amidst the suppressed gurgles of the other youths .
“ yes , you go with lucy .
the party sprang about from tuft to tuft of grass , their anxiety to keep together being only equalled by their desire to go different directions .
“ the faults of freddy ” cecil continued .
” he came in and shut the door .
“ and i’d stop here and tell my mother .
she gave up trying to understand herself , and joined the vast armies of the benighted , who follow neither the heart nor the brain , and march to their destiny by catch-words .
” exclaimed minnie beebe who had narrowly watched the iniquitous transaction .
“ so does mother .
at all events , she entered her own room without any feeling of joy .
the explanation seemed plausible , and freddy tried to accept it .
this was impertinent ;
i would never have let myself go .
outside it were poverty and vulgarity for ever trying to enter , just as the london fog tries to enter the pine-woods pouring through the gaps in the northern hills .
and she could not protest violently after her mother’s goodness to her upstairs .
“ george has been in such good spirits today , and i am sure he will end by coming up this afternoon .
from the very first moment when he said his father was having a bath .
it is on my muddles that i look back with horror on the things that i might have avoided .
the remark was a happy one , for nothing roused mrs honeychurch so much as literature in the hands of females .
presently they came to a little clearing among the pines another tiny green alp , solitary this time , and holding in its bosom a shallow pool .
she was not alarmed “ that you are in a muddle .
aha !
lucy stamped with irritation .
“ the garden of eden , ” pursued mr emerson , still descending , “ which you place in the past , is really yet to come .
and now you have gone over to the enemy .
“ pardon me , ” said a frigid voice .
the river was a lion that morning in strength , voice , and colour .
lucy had hoped to return to windy corner when she escaped from cecil , but she discovered that her home existed no longer .
the fault of anne is that she begs your pardon when she hears you perfectly , and kicks the chair-legs with her feet .
but the chaplain was really trying to qualify a rash remark .
she played schumann .
she had seen gluck’s armide that year , and played from memory the music of the enchanted garden the music to which renaud approaches , beneath the light of an eternal dawn , the music that never gains , never wanes , but ripples for ever like the tideless seas of fairyland .
“ boys are so odd .
“ i’ve brought someone to see you .
the woods had opened to leave space for a sloping triangular meadow .
certainly .
only , lucy and i are helpless against mrs honeychurch alone .
“ she is my sister , ” said he , turning round on them with piteous eyes .
but his stiffness remained , and , though he asked who cissie and albert might be , he still thought mr beebe rather a bounder .
it’s shocking enough to lose you in any case , but generally a man must deny himself joy , and i would have held back if your cecil had been a different person .
she was no dazzling exécutante ;
as they talked , an incredible solution came into lucy’s mind .
wait till you are calmer .
his little windows were chastely swathed in nottingham lace .
“ i never said i was .
where’s mother ?
we’ve lost the way .
“ i fear that lucy’s choice does not meet with your approval .
“ that is exactly what i fear , mr vyse .
it was pleasant , too , to fling wide the windows , pinching the fingers in unfamiliar fastenings , to lean out into sunshine with beautiful hills and trees and marble churches opposite , and close below , the arno , gurgling against the embankment of the road .
miss lavish will never dare to tell , and mr emerson does not think it worth telling .
“ but she did know , ” said george ;
“ i have been obstinate and silly worse than you know , far worse .
i never notice it in you young people ;
“ no , please sit still .
she said again , “ oh , cecil , whatever do you mean ?
they were fingers caressing her own ;
his courage had gone .
“ he must that man must have such a setting down that he won’t forget .
miss honeychurch , come you here i am in luck .
” he would look no one in the face ;
he conversed on indifferent topics :
“ he will try to be kind .
she might be forgetting her italy , but she was noticing more things in her england .
is it possible that men are such brutes ?
“ we go with lucy ?
ugh !
the sensation was curious .
“ it’s distinctly successful , as ponds go , ” said mr beebe .
“ oh , horrible , when we had given up that sort of thing and broken away from her parents .
“ yes , i heard from mother so last week .
i suspect that one day she will be wonderful in both .
“ don’t be silly .
but it all came while the fountain plashed to the satyrs in the morning sun .
“ well , he amuses me , ” she said .
i shall never face her again after this disaster .
” said mr emerson .
no , i have quite changed .
how after the death of that obscure italian he had leant over the parapet by the arno and said to her :
yes or no .
“ the things of the universe .
“ exactly .
” said his mother , trying to conceal her interest .
they were heavy curtains , reaching almost to the ground , and the light that filtered through them was subdued and varied .
he was absolutely intolerable , and the same evening she broke off her engagement .
they were tried by some new test , and they were found wanting .
then something did happen .
appearing thus late in the story , cecil must be at once described .
nor would charlotte have succeeded .
“ the scene is laid in florence .
“ it has been raining for nearly four hours , ” she said at last .
“ lucy !
nice and tiresome .
there are certain irremovable barriers between myself and them , and i must accept them .
” he pointed to the val d’arno , which was visible far below them , through the budding trees .
“ what train ?
“ no , i don’t think so , mother ;
“ i hate a row .
a silence followed which might have been impressive , but was merely awkward .
he had a theory that musicians are incredibly complex , and know far less than other artists what they want and what they are ;
why does any one tell anything ?
“ i want to go round the town in the circular tram on the platform by the driver .
i saw her the day i arrived at summer street .
“ humiliating indeed , ” said miss bartlett .
she echoed the raptures of charlotte somewhat faintly .
“ how’s charlotte ?
what nonsense i do talk !
a delightful morning !
victory of what and over what that is more than the words of daily life can tell us .
“ i vote tennis , ” said freddy , disgusted at the scrappy entertainment .
at that moment mr beebe came back from church .
mr beebe laughed and suggested that she should settle the question for herself .
ponte alle grazie particularly interesting , mentioned by dante .
“ i must !
we are obliged to become vaguely poetic , or to take refuge in scriptural reminiscences .
“ didn’t she say how she was ?
“ what do you mean ?
this was a stained window , through which some feeble light was shining , and when the door opened lucy heard mr beebe’s voice running through the litany to a minute congregation .
“ he is the clever sort , like myself , ” said cecil .
“ leave them alone , ” mr emerson begged the chaplain , of whom he stood in no awe .
the whole world seemed pale and void of its original meaning .
how abominably she behaved to charlotte , now as always !
“ i am so glad , ” said mrs honeychurch , while freddy proffered a hand that was yellow with chemicals .
“ i am glad that cecil is asking her this once more .
“ what on earth are those people doing upstairs ?
“ i think one might venture now .
come here and listen to me .
something gets added to it no one knows how just as something has got added to those hills .
“ true on the whole , ” she corrected , full of some vague shame .
and yet there was a rebellious spirit in her which wondered whether the acceptance might not have been less delicate and more beautiful .
he gave her a sense of deities reconciled , a feeling that , in gaining the man she loved , she would gain something for the whole world .
it was a saturday afternoon , gay and brilliant after abundant rains , and the spirit of youth dwelt in it , though the season was now autumn .
” she murmured , “ how more than dreadful , if mr vyse should come to hear of it from some other source .
nothing had been said about it yet .
” said lucy , whose voice remained steady .
he did not look at the ladies as he spoke , but his voice was perplexed and sorrowful .
no , never mind what you mean .
“ let it be your care that her knowledge is profitable to her .
pins , pots , heraldic saucers , brown art-photographs ;
my dear lucy , the deceit !
i would rather anything else even a misfortune with the meat .
“ why shouldn’t my permission be asked ?
he was an old man , of heavy build , with a fair , shaven face and large eyes .
how delightful a view is !
oh , horrible worst of all worse than death , when you have made a little clearing in the wilderness , planted your little garden , let in your sunlight , and then the weeds creep in again !
he felt , as all who have regular occupation must feel , that others should have it also .
they feared they had offended him .
every thoughtful man should ;
or , at all events , she had not noticed it .
two lone females in an unknown town .
presently lucy steps out of the drawing-room window .
they pry everywhere , they see everything , and they know what we want before we know it ourselves .
you have taught me better .
the appalling people they have sent me !
“ dear mrs vyse , cecil has just asked my permission about it , and i should be delighted if lucy wishes it .’ then i put in at the top , and i have told lucy so .’ i must write the letter out again and i have told lucy so .
i fancy that we deserve sorrow .
“ it is fate that i am here , ” persisted george .
amongst them were the two little old ladies of the pension bertolini miss teresa and miss catherine alan .
“ in hell , ” he repeated .
he waited , he gibbered , he was recompensed , he was dissatisfied , he did not leave them until he had swept their minds clean of all thoughts whether pleasant or unpleasant .
miss bartlett , by this timely exercise of her muscles , gained more than she would have got in hours of preaching or cross examination .
she reflected a moment , and then said , laughing :
it’s all i can’t explain it’s wrong .
and george , who loved passionately , must blunder against her in the narrow path .
miss bartlett only sighed , and enveloped her in a protecting embrace as she wished her good-night .
santa croce is a wonderful church .
her senses expanded ;
the early victorians .’ my sister had gone , and i felt bound to speak .
there !
oh , mr beebe !
he had known lucy for several years , but only as a commonplace girl who happened to be musical .
dinner was at half-past seven .
“ mr eager !
“ but i would like to help you .
“ i propose to speak to him , ” said she .
indeed , if it had not been for the good advice of an old man who was selling button-hooks , the road might never have got clear .
“ you say mr vyse wants me to listen to him , mr emerson .
they stared at him anxiously .
“ oh , it has been such a nuisance first he , then they no one knowing what they wanted , and everyone so tiresome .
there he saw “ dear mrs vyse , ” followed by many erasures .
bring back some milk , cakes , honey .
“ don’t neglect the country round , ” his advice concluded .
“ very well , old lady , stop the horse .
as you came through the wood i saw that nothing else mattered .
she and her mother shopped in silence , spoke little in the train , little again in the carriage , which met them at dorking station .
“ i dare not break your confidence .
“ race you round it , then , ” cried freddy , and they raced in the sunshine , and george took a short cut and dirtied his shins , and had to bathe a second time .
mother minds dreadfully .
that i love cecil and shall be his wife shortly ?
“ then , depend upon it , it is the boiler .
am i justified ?
i mean , charlotte knew them even less than i did .
“ well , i like him , ” said mrs honeychurch .
“ she would never forgive me .
go out into the sunshine , little boy , and kiss your hand to the sun , for that is where you ought to be .
“ hullo !
isn’t this news ?
that’s right , minnie , go for her get her over the shins with the racquet get her over the shins !
” said lucy , after much anxious thought .
at present she neither acquitted nor condemned him ;
his last remark , they knew , was nonsense , but was he going after it or not ?
with a painted ceiling whereon pink griffins and blue amorini sport in a forest of yellow violins and bassoons .
he did not know , and suggested that they should try to guess it .
so ran her thoughts , while her faculties were busy with cecil .
“ yes , i do .
“ you will never go up , ” said his father .
“ well , she would leave florence so stupidly .
“ i can’t be trodden on , can i ?
we were so sorry for you at dinner .
minnie slipped to her uncle and whispered that everyone was very disagreeable to-day , and that it was not her fault if dahlia-strings would tear longways instead of across .
.vision of the brotherhood of man .
” asked miss bartlett , flushed from the struggle , and buttoning up her dress .
in the interests of the comic muse and of truth , he would bring them to windy corner .
“ it’s the part of people that you don’t understand .
it is almost a test of refinement .
you are going to marry the man you love .
you stop here several weeks , i suppose ?
but i do believe that , far down in her heart , far below all speech and behaviour , she is glad .
“ oh , mr emerson , i see you’re clever !
you had no business to undo my work about the miss alans , and make me look ridiculous .
i agree so much that you must let me make one little criticism :
the thought disturbed her repentance .
stop !
i dare say you are used to something better .
cecil pulled lucy back as she followed her mother .
he is a clerk in the general manager’s office at one of the big railways not a porter !
“ water’s water , ” murmured george .
“ yes , ” said lucy .
“ how is that , mr vyse ?
was this the reception his action would get from the world ?
“ cissie ” was to let .
“ hush , mother !
the santa conversazione was broken up .
“ look , lucia !
he is for society and cultivated talk .
but she could not say it .
yet it existed , and it alone explains his action subsequently , and his influence on the action of others .
george , rather to her relief , refused to move , and she and the old man wandered not unpleasantly about santa croce , which , though it is like a barn , has harvested many beautiful things inside its walls .
it was as if he had made her see the whole of everything at once .
he couldn’t bear the honeychurch habit of sitting in the dark to save the furniture .
” was this where the idea would lead ?
“ and you are going to implore him , to beg him to keep silence ?
yes or no ?
“ you have a great deal , and i have a very great deal to forgive myself , too .
he said :
what if we popped off to rome to-morrow straight to the vyses’ hotel ?
i am absolutely certain that it is to your cousin’s credit .
it is our heritage .
the hero and heroine make love .
i shall go alone .’ she went .
other little frames , more severe , that stood on little easels , and were carven out of oak ;
“ now , did this happen , or didn’t it ?
she has marked the kingdom of this world , how full it is of wealth , and beauty , and war a radiant crust , built around the central fires , spinning towards the receding heavens .
were lucy and her cousin closeted with a great thing which would destroy cecil’s life if he discovered it , or with a little thing which he would laugh at ?
she summoned physical disgust .
shall we slip back into the darkness for ever ?
“ oh , don’t go !
“ do you know the vyses ?
“ suppose lucy marries cecil , would she live in a flat , or in the country ?
“ mr beebe knows my rude ways .
” yelled freddy , snatching up george’s bundle and placing it beside an imaginary goal-post .
“ ridiculous child !
” she murmured .
“ i can’t help it , mother .
“ would you add to your kindness by fetching them ?
perhaps anything that he did would have pleased lucy , but his awkwardness went straight to her heart ;
it’s worth minding , the loss of a baedeker .
“ chapter two , ” said cecil , yawning .
but though she spent nearly seven lire , the gates of liberty seemed still unopened .
” but to-day she felt she had received a guarantee .
mr eager does not like eleanor .
the seats were filled with a respectful audience , and the ladies and gentlemen of the parish , under the auspices of their vicar , sang , or recited , or imitated the drawing of a champagne cork .
but you were so sensible and brave so unlike the girls of my day .
“ what’s that ?
you are pretending to be touchy ;
“ has italy filled you with the fever of travel ?
these admirable ladies , since they could not go to cissie villa , had changed their plans .
he was vaguely suspicious .
their mission was to inspire others to achievement rather than to achieve themselves .
he became self-conscious and kept glancing round to see if they were observed .
and freddy , who ignored history and art , perhaps meant the same when he failed to imagine cecil wearing another fellow’s cap .
miss bartlett was absolutely helpless .
miss bartlett , who was thoroughly frightened , took up a book and pretended to read .
she was a visitor , not a chaperon , and a discredited visitor at that .
“ have you ever talked to vyse without feeling tired ?
no ordinary view will content the miss alans .
we can’t have charlotte on the top of the other things ;
he has , for the second time , quite altered .
i wish they’d take me .
she lifted them to the ceiling , where the griffins and bassoons were colourless and vague , the very ghosts of joy .
she did not answer .
mrs honeychurch , who had come up to town with her daughter , began to drum nervously upon her card-case .
come here .
one of the little boys fell down , and some white bullocks came out of an archway .
“ indeed , though it is dreadful for her to smoke , it is not quite as dreadful as you suppose .
i will say no more .
a point , dearest , which you alone can settle .
he was obliged to sit next to mr emerson , but he would not speak to him .
“ and me , i’ve swallowed one , ” answered he of the bracken .
i had much rather .
“ i shall never marry him , ” quavered lucy .
the young man named george glanced at the clever lady , and then returned moodily to his plate .
he can’t bear to be about here , and i must be where he is .
i have said both to her and cecil that i met the emersons at florence , and that they are respectable people which i do think and the reason that he offered miss lavish no tea was probably that he had none himself .
i had to say no when i couldn’t say yes .
“ quite right .
freddy looked at him doubtfully .
eros and psyche in alabaster ;
“ because it is quite out of the question , thank you .
“ and mr vyse ?
i behaved like a cad to beebe and to your brother .
he bowed .
she thought she had gone mad .
has he no particular hobby ?
you always overdo it when you play .
miss lavish frowned .
“ not that i know of .
do you mind tennis on sunday ?
“ i don’t care if he does .
he is treating us as if we were a party of cook’s tourists .
she did not pass judgement .
” she cleared her throat .
terror came over her , and she lied again .
“ but what can i do ?
“ do you notice , lucy , i’m always right ?
a try !
and you wrap yourself up in art and books and music , and would try to wrap up me .
“ not so that one could recognize it .
ha !
“ do you know that you’re right ?
then all the forces of youth burst out .
sir harry otway signed the agreement , met mr emerson , who was duly disillusioned .
trembling , anxious , cumbered with much digestive bread , they did proceed to constantinople , they did go round the world .
in spite of the clearest directions , miss bartlett contrived to bungle her arrival .
“ i like giotto , ” she replied .
“ look not thou on beauty’s charming .
miss bartlett returned the embrace with tenderness and warmth .
mr beebe and his mother had already gone , but she had refused to start until she obtained her hostess’s full sanction , for it would mean keeping the horse waiting a good ten minutes more .
“ indeed i have !
of course , it isn’t the tennis that was only the last straw to all i have been feeling for weeks .
” cried the girl suddenly .
“ baedeker ?
cecil laughed at her feminine inconsequence .
with a look of sombre satisfaction , he led the way to the peruzzi chapel .
“ i haven’t met them but i should say they were a highly unsuitable addition to the neighbourhood .
he had behaved abominably ;
imagine your mother’s feelings if i let you sit in the wet in your white linen .
but , after all , we can take that with us , and it is only getting first into a steamer and then into a train .
she wished she had not called attention to herself ;
as if no more was possible , he slipped back ;
“ lucy , i do call the way you talk unkind .
but we have souls .
“ grazie tante !
and the church , whatever its name is , still shows .
it’s a secret between us two for ever .
oh , certainly not ;
oh , mrs honeychurch , the oddest people !
come and have a bathe ,’ ” he chuckled .
mr beebe recognized him at once .
“ but why should they , when you have deceived them ?
“ i fear , ” said mr beebe , after a pause , “ that i have been officious .
why should she not change ?
“ he is the image of a porter on , on the south-eastern .
neither the ages of faith nor the age of doubt had touched him ;
he didn’t speak to her .
you feel i have been narrow-minded and suspicious ?
at the portraits of the late queen and the late poet laureate that hung behind the english people , heavily framed ;
“ it is a wonderful opportunity , the possession of leisure .
.
“ good gracious me , dear ;
they proceeded briskly through the undergrowth , which became thicker and thicker .
all the way back lucy’s body was shaken by deep sighs , which nothing could repress .
why were most big things unladylike ?
“ there are violets .
indeed , so ample was the muse’s equipment that she permitted mr harris , never a very robust criminal , to droop his head , to be forgotten , and to die .
i know the type .
i do so long to see him .
it is a revelation .
about five miles from dorking , looking over the weald .
but now ?
her eyes were his , and she had that forehead that i think so beautiful , and he will not think it worth while to live .
“ i don’t know whether they’re any emersons , ” retorted freddy , who was democratic .
lucy had lost mr eager .
he was referring to the fresco of the “ ascension of st .
while the two clergymen , who were expected to have topics in common , were left to each other .
but as we are talking about it , i may as well say that i shall want to be away in the future more than i have been .
because all that matters in them is distance and air .
i happen to know it for a fact .
“ we were speaking of motives , ” said cecil , on whom the interruption jarred .
” said the old man , and made as if he would come out of the garden to meet the lady .
ah , how beautiful the weald looked !
” said cecil , who did not like parsons .
for a brief space they were silent .
i have no one to help me .
but in scoring a dramatic point he had interested his audience more than he had intended .
it gave her light , and which he held more precious it gave her shadow .
” it was not surprising that mrs honeychurch disapproved of music , declaring that it always left her daughter peevish , unpractical , and touchy .
the tavern sign a beehive trimmed evenly with bees creaked in the wind outside as she thanked him .
a coolness had sprung up between the two cousins , and they had not corresponded since they parted in august .
in january you must go to london to entertain the grandchildren of celebrated men .
i really came to help with the child , and to thank you for so kindly giving us your rooms last night .
she escaped into the kitchen .
will you interpret for us ?
why could he not do as any labourer or navvy nay , as any young man behind the counter would have done ?
“ it is not victory , ” said mr emerson .
let us take mrs honeychurch’s advice and hate clergymen no more .
i will speak to him myself .
the addition of god was striking .
and it was persephone whom he asked leave to pick up on the way , saying that she was his sister persephone , tall and slender and pale , returning with the spring to her mother’s cottage , and still shading her eyes from the unaccustomed light .
barefoot , bare-chested , radiant and personable against the shadowy woods , he called :
” cried mrs honeychurch .
and it’s also something that mr beebe said , not knowing .
we all have our little foibles , and mine is the prompt settling of accounts .
minnie !
“ mr eager will be offended .
she pointed at the other carriage .
” cried george , so that again the ladies stopped .
they ran to get dry , they bathed to get cool , they played at being indians in the willow-herbs and in the bracken , they bathed to get clean .
all his life he had loved to study maiden ladies ;
mr beebe did not quite understand the situation ;
“ exposure !
“ well , thank you so much , ” she repeated , “ how quickly these accidents do happen , and then one returns to the old life !
they spit the seed out through the bars of the cages and then the mice come .
her pocket-handkerchief of a lawn was yellow with dandelions .
it is not your fault , this trouble , and it isn’t a disaster either .
feeling a little steadier , she put the book back and turned round to him .
mr beebe could recall no second murderer .
it does not count that they are going to bathe this afternoon .
“ yes , with no view , i fancy .
“ we think it so good of mr vyse to spare you , ” miss catharine continued .
she never gazed inwards .
you see , i come into my money next year .
“ charlotte !
the smallest he-baby stumbled over one of the sepulchral slabs so much admired by mr ruskin , and entangled his feet in the features of a recumbent bishop .
no one encouraged him to talk .
she added :
it faced north , so there was little view , and no view of the sky .
we are each paying for ourselves .
i am only gathering it from his own remarks .
the honeychurches had not forgiven them ;
“ here’s an idea .
her jaw dropped .
that under parnassus , where the eagles build and the bronze charioteer drives undismayed towards infinity .
here his foot slipped , and they all fell most agreeably on to the grass .
but the ladies interceded , and when it had been made clear that it was a very great favour , the goddess was allowed to mount beside the god .
she turned towards him from the shop counter ;
“ i say , those are topping people .
“ let’s go down to them .
“ come this way immediately , ” commanded cecil , who always felt that he must lead women , though he knew not whither , and protect them , though he knew not against what .
” he thought .
but you see what a tangle we were in by this time , all on account of s .
” called freddy from below .
no .
“ but it does seem hard that you shouldn’t have a view .
“ then may i write to my misses alan ?
“ pouf !
“ then you don’t see the wonder of this greek visit .
” the voices called .
“ what rubbish !
she hastened in to her mother , who was rapidly working herself into a sunday fluster .
if i might say so , there is something almost blasphemous in this horror of the elements .
“ and at present you think her not wonderful as far as life goes ?
when it comes to the point , he can’t get on without me .
you are inclined to get muddled , if i may judge from last night .
but let’s forget him .
everyone else is behaving very badly .
you have to go cold into a battle that needs warmth , out into the muddle that you have made yourself ;
she recalled the free , pleasant life of her home , where she was allowed to do everything , and where nothing ever happened to her .
he whispered :
why did he go ?
” cried the old man .
“ it is not every young man who would be so unselfish .
i know well how much i vex you at every turn .
i must be more careful .
lucy !
“ no , dear .
“ oh , bother that man !
the question is eternal , and it was not surprising that miss bartlett should only sigh faintly in response .
and just by the door it is too bad !
” he quoted from it .
it is the same with cecil all over .
“ we met at the rectory .
“ i quite agree with you , miss alan .
it is cecil who brought him here .
and think how he has been brought up free from all the superstition and ignorance that lead men to hate one another in the name of god .
“ hee-poof i’ve swallowed a pollywog , mr beebe , water’s wonderful , water’s simply ripping .
but he stretched his arms over the table towards her .
did powell go round ?
“ i don’t play tennis at least , not in public .
when cecil brought the emersons to summer street , it had upset her nerves .
that their psychology is a modern development , and has not yet been understood .
miss bartlett burst into florid gratitude .
for example , it isn’t purely coincidentally that you are here now , when one comes to reflect .
she knew he was there , and yet she went to church .
they climbed down a slippery bank of pine-needles .
i really mean it .
italy receded .
at his words she had turned and stood between him and the light with immeasurable plains behind her .
he is very fond of it .
youth seldom criticizes the accomplished fact .
“ from far , from eve and morning , and yon twelve-winded sky , the stuff of life to knit me blew hither :
she asked whether young mr emerson was ill .
“ yes .
mr beebe planned pleasant moments for the new-comers , and told mrs honeychurch that freddy must call on them as soon as they arrived .
the cries from the fountain they had never ceased rang emptily .
he is never ill .
then miss bartlett said “ so what is to be done ?
we can help one another but little .
and just as miss lavish had got the name , she broke off and exclaimed :
“ i knew he was trying it on .
the ghosts were returning ;
would you then , mr beebe , kindly tell mr emerson that i accept his kind offer , and then conduct him to me , in order that i may thank him personally ?
miss lavish told me .
” cried her companion , now standing some six feet above .
but ’ ” she stopped reading , “ i was rather amused at cecil asking my permission at all .
“ lucy can always play , ” was the acid reply .
we will incommode you no longer .
“ oh , oh !
“ i’m awfully sorry to interrupt , mr beebe , ” said freddy , “ but have you any matches ?
“ it’s a beautiful song and a wise one , ” said he .
her mother would always sit there , her brother here .
all that was gracious triumphed .
as her brain clouded over , as the memory of the views grew dim and the words of the book died away , she returned to her old shibboleth of nerves .
“ tired !
” he asked tentatively .
naughty cecil !
will the reader explain to her that the phrases should have been reversed ?
“ and how came we to have you here ?
she might well “ screech ” when she heard that it came partly from her lover .
isn’t afternoon tea given there for nothing ?
” said lucy , suddenly collapsing and again seeing the whole of life in a new perspective .
he said so .
but down here he acts the little god with his gentility , and his patronage , and his sham aesthetics , and every one even your mother is taken in .
“ i can’t stop .
“ here we are , all settled delightfully .
doors shut ;
to one of her upbringing , and of her destination , the weakness of men was a truth unfamiliar , but she had surmised it at florence , when george threw her photographs into the river arno .
with the roar of the opening theme he knew that things were going extraordinarily ;
it is his philosophy .
at the critical moment miss bartlett opened her own door , and her voice said :
further than freddy she did not go , but he gave her anxiety enough .
there was a haze of disapproval in the air , but whether the disapproval was of herself , or of mr beebe , or of the fashionable world at windy corner , or of the narrow world at tunbridge wells , she could not determine .
“ but i don’t see that !
he knew that the chaperon remembered .
two pleasant people sat in the room .
“ where ?
“ once a cad , always a cad , ” droned miss bartlett .
and who’s to give it him ?
he should just think he did know where .
now the old man attacked miss bartlett almost violently :
i hope he boxed your ears .
“ let me just put your bonnet away , may i ?
the book it seemed , was more valuable than one would have supposed .
“ no , ” said mrs honeychurch , with the air of one who has considered the subject , “ i shall not keep quiet .
“ hopeless vulgarian !
“ there is a scene in it .
“ perhaps .
don’t leave your comfortable house .
“ how could you think she was defending them ?
you do nothing but play lawn tennis , and say that romance is dead , while the miss alans are struggling with all the weapons of propriety against the terrible thing .
she raised her voice as she spoke ;
she must be more careful ;
“ i have a view , i have a view .
” she exclaimed suddenly .
but he hated the physical violence of the young .
“ i want to explain , ” said miss bartlett , “ why it is that i have taken the largest room .
and , equally of course , george emerson could come to tennis on the sunday week .
she could not recover herself .
as long as lucy thought that his own smart friends were supplanting the miss alans , she had not minded .
“ i wish miss lavish would tell me herself .
lucy stood by the central table , heedless of punch and the graphic , trying to answer , or at all events to formulate the questions rioting in her brain .
they both laughed , and things began to go better .
cecil’s hard hit .
poems had been written to illustrate this point .
“ oh , lucy , you ought to be with mr eager , i’m sure .
miss bartlett promptly got into the victoria .
it so happened that lucy , who found daily life rather chaotic , entered a more solid world when she opened the piano .
was he a cause of the renaissance , or was he one of its manifestations ?
miss bartlett agreed :
she has taken it .
then soldiers appeared good-looking , undersized men wearing each a knapsack covered with mangy fur , and a great-coat which had been cut for some larger soldier .
“ so you ought .
nor did she slacken speed till she caught up an old man with white whiskers , and nipped him playfully upon the arm .
i know by experience that the poets are right :
i cannot help her .
“ hullo , miss honeychurch !
big enough in all conscience .
oh , the agents !
would miss bartlett and miss honeychurch join the party ?
he looked distinguished , and it was very pleasant to see his slim figure keeping step with lucy , and his long , fair face responding when lucy spoke to him .
“ oh , no , charlotte , ” said the girl , entering the battle .
and all the time three little bundles lay discreetly on the sward , proclaiming :
” mumbled freddy .
no , i say !
he would like to throw us out , and most certainly he is justified .
mr beebe , whose social resources were endless , went out to order some tea , and she continued to lucy in a hasty whisper :
that there are shops abroad , even in athens , never occurred to them , for they regarded travel as a species of warfare , only to be undertaken by those who have been fully armed at the haymarket stores .
“ you don’t love me , evidently .
he replied , with some irritation , that it would be quite unnecessary , and got up from his seat to go to the smoking-room .
” called freddy , as he stripped himself .
i say , cecil , do play , do , there’s a good chap .
but she had always rehearsed them indoors , and with certain accessories , which surely we have a right to assume .
for a moment cecil was happy .
i have every reason to hope that i am first in the field .
the street and the river were dirty yellow , the bridge was dirty grey , and the hills were dirty purple .
” but this made no difference to her enthusiasm .
she has never got over it .
one candle burnt trembling on the chest of drawers close to miss bartlett’s toque , which cast monstrous and fantastic shadows on the bolted door .
minnie !
“ my own wishes , dearest lucy , are unimportant in comparison with yours .
“ but why , mr emerson ?
i might have known it would not do .
“ i think he is ;
“ far worse .
he said :
she had imagined a young mr emerson , who might be shy or morbid or indifferent or furtively impudent .
but she was not a stupid woman , and she knew perfectly well that lucy did not love her , but needed her to love .
what do you propose to do ?
“ well , i must say i’ve only seen her at tunbridge wells , where she was not wonderful , and at florence .
he recoiled without reading any more , and after a little hesitation sat down elsewhere , and pencilled a note on his knee .
“ now you get up off the cold floor , or you’ll be starting rheumatism next , and you stop laughing and being so silly .
i can’t have you moving out of your house when you like it , and perhaps losing money through it all on my account .
“ how ?
at last she longed for attention , as a woman should , and looked up to him because he was a man .
“ this isn’t the passage i wanted , ” he informed them , “ there is another much funnier , further on .
she opened the window to inspect , and a cold blast entered the room , drawing a plaintive cry from miss catharine alan , who entered at the same moment by the door .
gentlefolks !
we might have known the weather would break up soon ;
“ he behaved that way to me .
sometimes as i take tea in their beautiful grounds i hear , over the wall , the electric tram squealing up the new road with its loads of hot , dusty , unintelligent tourists who are going to do’ fiesole in an hour in order that they may say they have been there , and i think think i think how little they think what lies so near them .
the girl would not be degraded to this .
” she only felt irritable and petulant , and anxious to do what she was not expected to do , and in this spirit she proceeded with the conversation .
was that his waistcoat we left in the path ?
i’m so glad .
ow !
that is the man all over playing tricks on people , on the most sacred form of life that he can find .
“ cecil mr beebe the ticket’s bought everything .
kiss me here .
“ i had forgotten the driver , ” said miss bartlett , reddening .
freddy only told me because he knew she would not mind .
they are certain to have canaries .
” exclaimed mr beebe to himself , and struck the saddle of his bicycle approvingly , “ it was the one foolish thing she ever did .
” said mrs honeychurch , waving her hand at the furniture .
oh , poor mr beebe !
she was gazing sideways .
water , sky , evergreens , a wind these things not even the seasons can touch , and surely they lie beyond the intrusion of man ?
“ for something tremendous has happened ;
thus the half-hour crept profitably away , and at last miss bartlett rose with a sigh , and said :
, and said she liked plain speaking , and meeting different grades of thought .
after dinner miss lavish actually came up and said :
it had become a great thing now .
“ dear ?
i have seen a good deal of the seamy side this last week .
“ do you know where i met these desirable tenants ?
no enthusiasm .
but his face revived her .
it was not that ladies were inferior to men ;
“ for goodness’ sake go out of my drawing-room , then ?
they won’t notice us so much next time .
that the earth was hastening to re-enter darkness , and the shadows of those trees over windy corner ?
driven by nameless bewilderment , by what is in older people termed “ eccentricity , ” lucy determined to make this point clear .
from the cab-driver down to to giotto , they turn us inside out , and i resent it .
wasn’t it a splendid thing for lucy and for windy corner generally if he married her ?
” said lucy .
“ miss honeychurch , dear , we are so sorry !
she had chosen the moment before bed , when , in accordance with their bourgeois habit , she always dispensed drinks to the men .
somehow it was impossible to cheat this old man .
the piazza signoria is too stony to be brilliant .
he stepped into the drawing-room , where lucy was still attentively pursuing the sonatas of mozart .
“ oh , please !
” lucy nodded .
“ hateful bishop !
and your mother and all your friends will despise you , oh , my darling , and rightly , if it is ever right to despise .
“ here we are !
“ yes , ” replied the clergyman .
she was in her cousin’s power .
“ i said to cecil , take her or leave her ;
over the whole thing i can’t explain i do feel so uncomfortable .
but the future .
clothes flew in all directions .
“ no , not at all .
but he worried about it none the less .
everything is fate .
no one knew , or seemed to care .
“ my italian trip came too late , and i am forgetting all that i learnt there .
i tried to laugh as if i didn’t mean what i said , and , as cecil laughed too , and went away , it may be all right .
“ you have done more than all the relics in the world .
while windy corner seemed as inevitable as an ugliness of nature’s own creation .
this is a most serious thing .
“ my dear freddy , i am no athlete .
“ mother , no !
it was not an exploit .
dress now .
you couldn’t have made me .
i saw him looking through the bushes at you , remember he had a violet between his teeth .
why ?
but the joys of life were grouping themselves anew .
“ and so for this and for other reasons my history of coincidence’ is still to write .
“ i had rather be alone .
lucy waited for nearly ten minutes .
she had known the wood between summer street and windy corner ever since she could walk alone ;
“ i can’t think , ” said lucy again .
“ oh last sunday .
“ you will be seen from the road .
we can never have too much of the dear piazza signoria .
how you do remind me of your mother .
mr beebe reminded her that constantinople was still unlikely , and that the miss alans only aimed at athens , “ with delphi , perhaps , if the roads are safe .
i’ll just finish your sock .
“ cecil !
“ they might amuse you .
how funny !
she stopped with her hand on her heart .
“ i said :
” his voice broke .
some one was there already , for lucy heard the words :
“ fiasco’s done you this time , ” remarked freddy , not seeing that his sister’s face was very red .
he said he did not know that you lived in the neighbourhood ( ?) .
she and miss bartlett are full of the praises of your sermon .
“ i fancy mr beebe jumped back into the pond .
then the cousins wished success to her labours , and walked slowly away across the square .
novels with a purpose ;
” and the horse was stopped , and lucy and powell wrestled with the hood , and squirted water down mrs honeychurch’s neck .
and he would have an answer he said it would strengthen his hand .
there all the time we had to sit fencing , and almost telling lies , and be seen through , too , i dare say , which is most unpleasant .
he knows nothing .
“ i always said he was a cad , dear .
“ told her what ?
“ i don’t see why mr vyse is to have the quid .
“ was i a bore ?
“ welcome as one of the family !
“ often before i have wondered if i was fitted for your wife for instance , in london ;
“ i forgot it was friday .
“ do we find happiness so often that we should turn it off the box when it happens to sit there ?
i consider it most disloyal of you .
when they returned he was not as pleasant as he had been .
but he seemed so near the end of things , so dignified in his approach to the gulf , of which he gave one account , and the books that surrounded him another , so mild to the rough paths that he had traversed , that the true chivalry not the worn-out chivalry of sex , but the true chivalry that all the young may show to all the old awoke in her , and , at whatever risk , she told him that cecil was not her companion to greece .
she will never forgive me , and rightly .
i am sure that she will be happy , for we know mr vyse , too .
george did not respond to the bow .
miss bartlett was , after all , a wee bit tired , and thought they had better spend the morning settling in ;
she remembered their last evening at florence the packing , the candle , the shadow of miss bartlett’s toque on the door .
“ you must fall back on lucy .
yet they may have a tacit sympathy with the workings of nature which is denied to us of the town .
“ i mean that a new person seems speaking through you , ” said he .
for i do know what i want .
“ of course , there is no question of someone else’ in this , no jilting’ or any such nauseous stupidity .
i don’t hate him , but i don’t like him .
i’ve seen you cross with mrs butterworth yourself !
“ then it will have to be lucy , ” said mrs honeychurch ;
but when they entered the shrubbery it came .
there she bought a photograph of botticelli’s “ birth of venus .
she has betrayed my confidence .
certainly not with you .
“ it is what i gathered from my own observation of mr vyse ;
“ oh , do keep quiet , mother !
the outdoor world was not very familiar to him , and occasionally he went wrong in a question of fact .
can you wonder ?
i can’t help it had to say it .
“ but things are so difficult , i sometimes think .
“ we are to raise ladies to our level ?
she took refuge in her dignity .
“ i am not touchy , i hope .
i am sorry i used it about your son .
i am a woman of the world , in my small way , and i know where things lead to .
bless us and save us !
“ she must spare me !
“ that lady looks so clever , ” whispered miss bartlett to her cousin .
of the many things lucy was noticing to-day , not the least remarkable was this :
“ it is just possible .
it will be good for both of you .
she remained in much embarrassment , while mrs honeychurch changed her frock for dinner ;
“ i am so glad to see you , ” said the girl , who was in a state of spiritual starvation , and would have been glad to see the waiter if her cousin had permitted it .
where is the child ?
but he was not the good man that she had expected , and he was alone .
“ because mr beebe has asked eleanor lavish to come , too .
i broke off my engagement because i did not love george ;
“ now kiss me here ;
nor did he realize a more important point that if she was too great for this society , she was too great for all society , and had reached the stage where personal intercourse would alone satisfy her .
why , i myself have worries , but i can generally forget them at the piano ;
“ oh , all right .
“ .
“ what a delightful part ;
“ let me see , mr vyse i forget what is your profession ?
miss bartlett insisted on leaning over the parapet to look at it .
there was some murder scene , and really everyone must listen to it .
they were such gossips , and if one told them , the news would be everywhere in no time .
“ you’ve a bad habit of hurrying away in the middle of one’s sentences .
“ you have not reflected at all , ” rapped the clergyman .
“ aren’t those masses of willow-herb splendid ?
one wanted a man with a whip .
she reigned in many an early victorian castle , and was queen of much early victorian song .
“ very well , ” said lucy , with an angry gesture .
lucy , apparently absorbed in a lunette , could hear the lecture again interrupted , the anxious , aggressive voice of the old man , the curt , injured replies of his opponent .
“ i do hope she’s nice .
you are jealous of cecil because he may stop lucy knitting you silk ties .
lucy sat beside her ;
on the other hand , his son was a young man , and she felt that a girl ought to be offended with him , or at all events be offended before him .
“ here’s sir harry .
advancing towards it very slowly and from immense distances , they touched the stone with their fingers , with their handkerchiefs , with their heads , and then retreated .
the bank broke away , and he fell into the pool before he had weighed the question properly .
it was expensive and dramatic both qualities that her mother loathed .
her perceptions this morning were curiously keen , and she believed that miss lavish had her on trial for an ingenué .
up till now mrs honeychurch had behaved with charity and restraint .
“ not a kiss for me ?
when they were out of earshot miss bartlett stopped her wails and said quite briskly :
really , the pension bertolini must have been the oddest place .
the road up through the pine-woods , the clean drawing-room , the view over the sussex weald all hung before her bright and distinct , but pathetic as the pictures in a gallery to which , after much experience , a traveller returns .
“ i think things are coming to a head , ” she observed , rather wanting her son’s opinion on the situation if she could obtain it without undue supplication .
“ m’m .
she was like a woman of leonardo da vinci’s , whom we love not so much for herself as for the things that she will not tell us .
but never again were they in such profusion ;
but mr emerson , contrite and unhappy , hurried away to apologize to the rev .
silence .
“ you see , charlotte , your kindness i shall never forget it .
you won’t marry the other man for his sake .
at the end of five minutes lucy departed in search of mr beebe and mr eager , vanquished by the mackintosh square .
he was nothing to her ;
better bow .
” cried mr beebe .
in her chastened mood she no longer despised the emersons .
want any tea ?
miss lavish gave a machiavellian smile .
i might have hurt myself falling .
neither of them referred again to her suggestion that she should speak to george and settle the matter , whatever it was , with him .
with no view ?
﻿ “ the signora had no business to do it , ” said miss bartlett , “ no business at all .
read away .
miss bartlett , in reply , opened her mouth as little as possible , and said “ thank you very much indeed ;
thus he was incidentally enabled to discuss the fortunes of lucy .
cecil praised one too much for being athletic .
then she said that she had been in the piazza since eight o’clock collecting material .
“ oh , dear !
to-day , i believe that we must discover nature .
she left him .
“ oh , you have property in surrey ?
i begged you , implored you not to , but of course it was not listened to .
she had dwelt amongst melody and movement , and her nerves refused to answer to the clang of his .
“ it is not rubbish !
lucy sat down at the table .
freddy and mr floyd were sure to retire with their glasses , while cecil invariably lingered , sipping at his while she locked up the sideboard .
“ if you’ve no baedeker , ” said the son , “ you’d better join us .
is leonora the heroine ?
“ albert ” was inhabited .
it put their visitor in the position of a prig .
“ there !
she turned to mr emerson in despair .
mr beebe looked at the sobbing girl .
take the word of an old woman , miss lucy :
” said cecil .
miss bartlett had not heard of alessio baldovinetti , but she knew that mr eager was no commonplace chaplain .
the boy an innocent child at the time i will exclude .
“ i say , lucy !
paganism is infectious more infectious than diphtheria or piety and the rector’s niece was taken to church protesting .
much better not .
“ nonsense , freddy !
“ i’m sure it’s all right , ” put in lucy .
for mr beebe was just crawling out of the pond , on whose surface garments of an intimate nature did float ;
passion does not blind .
but , unluckily , mr emerson overheard this part , and called in his deep voice :
“ poor girl !
” she withdrew a step .
” she asked , with growing agitation .
the scales fell from lucy’s eyes .
” after this remark she remained motionless and silent .
“ every right .
the shopman was possibly listening .
then miss bartlett hastily purchased the leaning tower , and led the way into the street .
” he cried .
” cried lucy .
she had to subdue a rush in her blood before saying :
we can always say that we have not got it .
and no , you are not , not , not to look at your baedeker .
it is hard when a person you have classed as typically british speaks out of his character .
her sister was a little disappointed in mr beebe , having expected better things from a clergyman whose head was bald and who wore a pair of russet whiskers .
“ you’re quite right , ” said cecil .
no one is perfect , and surely it is wiser to discover the imperfections before wedlock .
“ i’m glad it’s that you minded .
the country gentleman and the country labourer are each in their way the most depressing of companions .
he was occupied in his cigar , and in holding back the pliant boughs .
“ dreadful !
at all events he greeted him with , “ how d’ye do ?
“ no , of course , ” said lucy , ashamed at the reference to cecil .
he took the book from her .
she was then no longer either deferential or patronizing ;
” she was even glad that miss bartlett had made her promise secrecy , that last dark evening at florence , when they had knelt packing in his room .
” she exclaimed with some warmth .
i don’t understand a word you say .
“ am i to conclude , ” said miss bartlett , “ that he is a socialist ?
such was the embrace .
“ yet our rooms smell , ” said poor lucy .
but before he left tunbridge wells he made a remark to the vicar , which he now made to lucy herself when she closed the little piano and moved dreamily towards him :
“ he jolted us .
anxiety moved her to question him .
but at the back of his brain there lurked a dim mistrust .
“ that’s good hearing .
it was necessary to keep clean .
“ fifteen shillings and five shillings make one pound , you see .
“ no .
she returned with new eyes .
lucy shuddered a little .
it is easy to face death and fate , and the things that sound so dreadful .
surely the vendor of photographs was in league with lucy in the eternal league of italy with youth .
cecil , who naturally preferred congratulations to apologies , drew down his mouth at the corners .
i have not seen poor charlotte for so long .
“ you’ve frightened me , ” she moaned .
you are too unselfish ;
i had to say no .
“ not that , but the congratulations .
we have pushed our beliefs too far .
“ harris , ” said lucy glibly .
“ lucy have you a sixpence for minnie and a shilling for yourself ?
thank god , chivalry is not yet dead .
“ i needn’t say that it will go no further .
her face reddened with displeasure .
let me refer you for an account to miss catharine alan , who uses words herself more admirably than any one i know .
i mean , to suppose that a woman is always thinking about a man .
“ were over at the loggia .
the ground will do for me .
when do they start ?
what did you say ?
“ but charlotte what about the promise you gave me when we were packing ?
i shall bow .
there was simply the sense that she had found wings , and meant to use them .
“ the tune’s right enough , ” said freddy , “ but the words are rotten .
mr beebe rather felt that they had gone under .
“ i did hold firm .
“ i must be with george ;
lucy !
an electric tram came rushing underneath the window .
you know nothing about it .
“ national gallery .
the true italy is only to be found by patient observation .
the other day in santa croce , when he was with miss honeychurch , i snubbed him .
god knows what his education and his inherited qualities may have made him .
but possibly rant is a sign of vitality :
“ he may be killed !
perhaps that was the view which one would take eventually .
“ ask your driver which way george went .
” said sir harry excitedly .
something warned lucy that she must stop him .
they filed out of the chapel in silence .
” mrs honeychurch cried .
“ would she like to see them ?
“ poor girl !
“ niente .
failed in my duty to your mother .
how would you like spinsters ?
“ yes , why shouldn’t you come by yourself ?
a carriage was drawn up outside windy corner , and just as he caught sight of the house it started , bowled up the drive , and stopped abruptly when it reached the main road .
“ oh , you wicked woman , ” cried miss bartlett .
it struck her that he was not behaving so badly , and her irritation increased .
“ where aren’t they ?
“ is it worth it ?
the secret , big or little , was guarded .
“ so will you .
without us shall no enterprise begin .
“ piano !
but where exactly had he stood ?
“ poor girl ?
she greeted cecil with unusual radiance , because she felt so safe .
there was only one way of treating the situation .
but it is such an awkward size .
” freddy panted .
“ that’s it ;
but freddy was his mother’s son and felt that one ought not to go on spoiling the furniture .
as she might not go on the electric tram , she went to alinari’s shop .
we just got through that time .
no , you said you’d go to the ends of the earth !
for she was determined to enjoy herself on the morrow .
and now celestial irony , working through her cousin and two clergymen , did not suffer her to leave florence till she had made this expedition with him through the hills .
in spite of the season , mrs vyse managed to scrape together a dinner-party consisting entirely of the grandchildren of famous people .
if mr emerson thinks us frivolous , he can go .
mr beebe passed into it .
she had never known him offended before .
“ mr emerson is engaged , but here is his son instead .
“ i confess that in italy my sympathies are not with my own countrymen .
the girl received the announcement as easily as it had been given .
miss bartlett thanked him for his kindness , and spoke with enthusiasm of the approaching drive .
oddly enough , it was an easy topic .
the string breaks .
but spoil us by not asking her to come .
i was grateful to you for your letter , but even if the news does get round , i think i can trust cecil to laugh at it .
the two ladies huddled together under an inadequate parasol .
“ very well , thank you .
she should have tried at the rectory .
“ you may well ask that , ” replied miss bartlett , who was evidently interested , and had almost dropped her evasive manner .
“ i’m sure she will ;
and miss lavish , though unwilling to ally him , felt bound to support the cause of bohemianism .
” he obeyed .
“ find me chapter two , if it isn’t bothering you .
“ just what i remember .
something had happened to the living :
anything is fair that punishes a snob .
her two companions looked grave .
she thought not so much of what had happened as of how she should describe it .
“ well , i owe you a thousand apologies .
lucy’s lips parted .
“ gracious alive !
the cabman drove away singing .
these titles were not only picked out in shaded gothic on the garden gates , but appeared a second time on the porches , where they followed the semicircular curve of the entrance arch in block capitals .
when it was over she capped it by a story of her own .
“ stop !
“ i promessi sposi , ” said he .
” said she at last .
” he cried .
but lucy hardened her heart .
she watched his head , which was almost resting against her knee , and she thought that the ears were reddening .
“ no , i didn’t , ” he said .
she is not always quoting servants , or asking one how the pudding is made .
“ and i wonder whether we ought to write to the miss alans and offer to give it up .
permission granted , she began to chatter gently about italy , the plunge it had been to come there , the gratifying success of the plunge , the improvement in her sister’s health , the necessity of closing the bed-room windows at night , and of thoroughly emptying the water-bottles in the morning .
her feelings were as inflated spiritually as they had been an hour ago esthetically , before she lost baedeker .
“ bless us !
love is of the body ;
“ it is too far out of town for the young gentleman , and his father’s rheumatism has come on , so he can’t stop on alone , so they are trying to let furnished , ” was the answer .
he considered , with truth , that it had been a failure .
he has let me come and ask you .
” cried miss lavish .
“ that must have saved you much .
“ i’m very sorry , ” she cried .
i daren’t face the healthy person for example , freddy honeychurch .
“ if you think i am in love with some one else , you are very much mistaken .
lucy obeyed .
she had given him a hazy account of her adventures in santa croce , and he gathered that the two men had made a curious and possibly concerted attempt to annex her , to show her the world from their own strange standpoint , to interest her in their private sorrows and joys .
other houses in the neighborhood had been built by expensive architects , over others their inmates had fidgeted sedulously , yet all these suggested the accidental , the temporary ;
that day she had seemed a typical tourist shrill , crude , and gaunt with travel .
the hills stood out above its radiance , as fiesole stands above the tuscan plain , and the south downs , if one chose , were the mountains of carrara .
“ because we think it improves our characters .
“ the driver ?
it isn’t exactly that a man has died .
“ then there came something about a novel .
if cecil disliked sir harry otway and mr beebe , what guarantee was there that the people who really mattered to her would escape ?
the storm had ceased , and mr emerson was easier about his son .
mrs honeychurch’s mouth twitched when he spoke of the perpetual green of the larch .
she leaves the dust-pans standing on the stairs .
“ it’s like a school feast ;
what miserable management !
it is my affair .
“ do you mean , ” she asked , “ that he is an irreligious man ?
the fault is mine :
“ she oughtn’t really to go at all , ” said mr beebe , as they watched her from the window , “ and she knows it .
neptune was already unsubstantial in the twilight , half god , half ghost , and his fountain plashed dreamily to the men and satyrs who idled together on its marge .
miss lavish seemed interested , and slackened her trot .
then she completed her inspection of the room , sighed heavily according to her habit , and went to bed .
“ whether it is mr beebe who forgot to tell mr eager , or mr eager who forgot when he told us , or whether they have decided to leave eleanor out altogether which they could scarcely do but in any case we must be prepared .
“ you’ll think me unfeeling , but but ” then she became matronly .
“ this isn’t very kind of you two .
no , it was wrong of george to try .
“ who found you out ?
cecil won’t let a woman decide for herself in fact , he daren’t .
how odd girls are !
the other two occupants of the carriage were old mr emerson and miss lavish .
she had always longed to go to greece even more , it seemed .
i told him it was unwise .
it mars the beautiful creature , but shows that she is alive .
what’s that book ?
“ of course , ” said he , wondering why she bothered to explain .
i hate him .
we are only two women , you and i .
lucy to descend from bright heaven to earth , whereon there are shadows because there are hills lucy was at first plunged into despair , but settled after a little thought that it did not matter the very least .
“ i am so sorry , but it is no good discussing this affair .
they are quite the right people .
lucy was pleased , and said :
the darkness .
but he will not think it worth while to live .
george went into the next chapel and returned , saying “ perhaps he is .
they will end by going round the world .
” and she began to nod and smile .
so it happened that from patronizing civility he had slowly passed if not to passion , at least to a profound uneasiness .
he must weigh as much as i do , and he is shooting into the sky like an air balloon .
he said his father had just taken the house .
standing outside , we deride or oppose it , or at the most feel sentimental .
miss bartlett , who had intended to lament over the emersons , was launched by this remark into unexpected thoughts .
seated on a promontory herself , she could see the pine-clad promontories descending one beyond another into the weald .
“ all that you say is quite true , ” said lucy , though she felt discouraged .
you aren’t forgetting your italy already ?
” but he only supposed that she was ready for an adventure , not that she had encountered it .
“ but pick it up , and don’t stand idling there like a flamingo .
“ make her one of us , ” repeated mrs vyse , and processed to bed .
“ sometimes they are forced on us , though , ” said cecil , who saw from her remark that she did not quite understand his position .
i fail to understand the point of that remark .
despise the house that your father built and the garden that he planted , and our dear view and then share a flat with another girl .
“ have you told him about him yet ?
but then , so is most information .) then miss lavish darted under the archway of the white bullocks , and she stopped , and she cried :
meanwhile mr eager held her in civil converse ;
it was phaethon who drove them to fiesole that memorable day , a youth all irresponsibility and fire , recklessly urging his master’s horses up the stony hill .
my father always voted for mr gladstone , until he was so dreadful about ireland .
no definite problem menaced her , but she sighed to herself , “ oh , dear , what shall i do , what shall i do ?
she knows it herself .
it was one of mr beebe’s chief pleasures to provide people with happy memories .
he uttered this remark with a voice full of meaning , and ended with a sigh .
cecil’s all right .
what’s this place ?
constantinople is practically asia , isn’t it ?
it must only be broached within the walls of the english bank .
” he lit a cigarette , and went on talking to the two young men .
“ only once .
she could not make him understand that perhaps they had missed the clergymen .
“ i’m shockingly stupid over local affairs , ” said the young man languidly .
“ va bene , signore , va bene , va bene , ” crooned the driver , and whipped his horses up again .
” bowing right and left .
“ oh , charlotte , ” cried lucy to her cousin , “ we must have the rooms now .
“ what’s there to cry at ?
she thought it a judgement .
lucy was on her guard at once , knowing by bitter experience what forgiving miss bartlett meant .
no , she wasn’t wonderful in florence either , but i kept on expecting that she would be .
i mention her name because we are passing her villa on the left .
to one who loves the florence of dante and savonarola there is something portentous in such desecration portentous and humiliating .
it will attract the wrong type of people .
let us rather love one another , and work and rejoice .
he commanded lucy to agree with him ;
miss bartlett , though skilled in the delicacies of conversation , was powerless in the presence of brutality .
“ i will take you by a dear dirty back way , miss honeychurch , and if you bring me luck , we shall have an adventure .
“ oh , lucy , dearest girl she hasn’t put that in her book ?
why should he want me for a brother-in-law ?
it’s so beautiful .
mr beebe felt hurt , for he had thought that she would like him to be told .
the air rang with his threats and lamentations .
like a gothic statue .
” but she remained standing where she was .
things won’t fit .
“ courage and love .
“ oh , very slightly .
mr beebe raised his eyebrows .
“ i hope we all try , ” said she , smiling nervously .
” he carried her to the window , so that she , too , saw all the view .
“ i am sure you are thinking of the emersons .
i would rather go up to heaven by myself than be pushed by cherubs ;
i found that he wouldn’t let me go my own way .
mrs honeychurch , i only called in aimlessly .
“ oh , a dreadful person mr emerson , you remember miss lavish ?
“ signora bertolini would be upset .
but how like a barn !
cecil had been hesitating whether he should despise the villas or despise sir harry for despising them .
they heard the river , bearing down the snows of winter into the mediterranean .
“ ah , but yes !
only he starts life with it ;
i do not wish the acceptance to come from you .
“ she thanked me for coming till i felt like such a fool , and fussed round no end to get an egg boiled for my tea just right .
“ i should say so .
“ look at their figures !
george is so sorry !
“ what name ?
oh , what a glorious riddance !
do be more careful .
their tongues were loosed , and they burst into stealthy rejoicings .
i am just going to greece .
“ just because they’re old and silly one’s expected to say how sweet !’ i hate their if’-ing and but’-ing and and’-ing .
in the company of this common man the world was beautiful and direct .
“ don’t say all right’ and stop .
by understanding george you may learn to understand yourself .
she will read all kinds of books .
he repeated :
it struck her that it was hopeless to look for chivalry in such a man .
honest orthodoxy cecil respected , but he always assumed that honesty is the result of a spiritual crisis ;
more certain than ever that she was tired , he offered her his chair .
“ i’m not sure she understands english , ” suggested lucy .
“ of course , miss honeychurch will make the fact public in her own way , and when she chooses .
“ it is defeat .
i’m bad , floyd’s rotten , and so i dare say’s emerson .
“ any letters ?
what do you mean ?
but i’m afraid it will only act between men .
“ look at him !
“ here’s my mother .
presently mr eager gave a signal for the carriages to stop and marshalled the party for their ramble on the hill .
mr beebe watched them , and watched the seeds of the willow-herb dance chorically above their heads .
if you want to know , quite a little thing decided me to speak to you when you wouldn’t play tennis with freddy .
mr beebe , whose news was of a very different nature , prattled forward .
“ perhaps , ” said miss bartlett , “ it is something that we had better not hear .
a long black column , he stood and awaited her reply .
“ wait a minute ;
“ quite so .
they were silent .
“ there’s nothing else to say .
lucy clenched her teeth .
mr beebe , at leisure for life’s amenities , leant over his rectory gate .
” the river swirled under the bridge , “ i did mind them so , and one is so foolish , it seemed better that they should go out to the sea i don’t know ;
he had heard from the miss alans .
“ since florence did my poor sister so much good , ” wrote miss catharine , “ we do not see why we should not try athens this winter .
then here .
“ there goes my local-colour box !
then she prepared for action .
pray don’t waste time mourning over me .
then miss lavish said :
whatever was charlotte doing to stop ?
“ i shall have enough of my own , now that you are not pleased with cecil .
“ good afternoon , mr beebe .
” asked her mother .
“ he was such a nice old man , i’m sure .
first she tried perugia for an inspiration , then she came here this must on no account get round .
“ i did not , ” she said .
and several references i took up were most unsatisfactory people swindlers , or not respectable .
give me credit for that , at all events .
lucy had no reaction at least , not yet .
” he turned over the leaves .
the rest of the pattern is the other people .
miss lavish looked at the narrow ribbon of sky , and murmured :
her new cerise dress has been a failure , and makes her look tawdry and wan .
though i am a real radical as well .
perhaps she was right .
the voice of mr eager ?
“ the bother is this , ” began freddy .
“ i am sorry i have given you a shock , ” he said dryly .
“ she’s started on her sunday writing .
“ doesn’t mrs honeychurch like music ?
” cried mrs honeychurch , who hoped to cure her children of slang by taking it literally .
she wanted something big , and she believed that it would have come to her on the wind-swept platform of an electric tram .
” cried mrs honeychurch , touching the coachman with her parasol .
” she echoed , hopelessly bewildered .
i am lucky to be appointed to such a charming neighbourhood .
“ that man murdered his wife !
“ yes , ” she said , raising her voice , “ i do hope he will .
lucy thought this rather a good speech .
she felt she had made almost too many allowances , and apologized hurriedly for her toleration .
but she doesn’t like one to get excited over anything ;
during this speech the two figures on the box were sporting with each other disgracefully .
it really does ;
she did not know it was done .
“ yes , of course ;
and they find him out , and are offended , or frightened .
“ leonora ,’ ” he read , “ sat pensive and alone .
it is so difficult at least , i find it difficult to understand people who speak the truth .
“ why ?
in it i spy lucy’s salvation .
cecil has just asked my permission about it , and i should be delighted if lucy wishes it , and i have told lucy so .
but the point is that miss lavish was positively attracted by his mentioning s .
they are coming .
she looked on the expedition as the work of fate .
that’s why i’ll speak out through all this muddle even now .
“ vacant heart and hand and eye easy live and quiet die .
lucy !
but he is kind to people because he loves them ;
“ it’s so obvious they should have the rooms , ” said the son .
“ i shall want to live , i say .
“ i’m the same kind of brute at bottom .
she is one of us already .
and the time i shall have with mother , and all the money she spent on me last spring .
“ i have behaved ridiculously .
he must have carried her .
are you through with the church ?
generally at a pension people looked them over for a day or two before speaking , and often did not find out that they would “ do ” till they had gone .
he smiled .
what are we to do ?
“ saturn bounces enough .
“ this very square so i am told witnessed yesterday the most sordid of tragedies .
and , dear , i only blame you for this :
“ why do you call it that ?
“ you fainted .
in the very height of their emotion they knew it to be unmanly or unladylike .
the miss alans ?
he said he knew it was madness when you brought your cousin in ;
“ rather not .
as if a girl can’t break it off for the sake of freedom .
“ remember nothing of the sort !
as they walked up the garden , the orange cactus fell , and mr beebe’s last vision was of the garden-child clasping it like a lover , his dark head buried in a wealth of blossom .
like any boy , he blushed and was ashamed ;
to think that evening at the rectory that she shouldn’t have heard your father was in the house .
“ do you mind being beaten ?
fortunately an italian lady , who ought to have been saying her prayers , came to the rescue .
he was not even angry , but stood , with a glass of whiskey between his hands , trying to think what had led her to such a conclusion .
“ yes , mother , you told me .
“ now don’t be stupid over this .
george told him that he was mistaken ;
because the shadow always follows .
i would give anything to go with them .
“ does he not matter ?
he suggested that mrs honeychurch , if she had time , should descend from the carriage and inspect “ cissie ” for herself .
“ willingly would i purchase ” began miss bartlett .
mr beebe , whose opinion of her rose daily , whispered to his niece that that was the proper way to behave if any little thing went wrong .
“ i don’t .
perhaps he cannot ;
the commonplace person begins to play , and shoots into the empyrean without effort , whilst we look up , marvelling how he has escaped us , and thinking how we could worship him and love him , would he but translate his visions into human words , and his experiences into human actions .
“ she has learnt through you , ” and if his voice was still clerical , it was now also sincere ;
lucy , elegantly dressed in white , sat erect and nervous amid these explosive ingredients , attentive to mr eager , repressive towards miss lavish , watchful of old mr emerson , hitherto fortunately asleep , thanks to a heavy lunch and the drowsy atmosphere of spring .
i think three is such a courageous number to go travelling .
come , lucy .
how is she ?
“ music ” said lucy , as if attempting some generality .
” said mrs honeychurch absently .
she shook her head and played schumann again .
“ her what ?
charlotte , who was practical without ability , knelt by the side of an empty trunk , vainly endeavouring to pave it with books of varying thickness and size .
” said mrs honeychurch .
does it seem reasonable that she should play so wonderfully , and live so quietly ?
miss bartlett was in the drawing-room , gazing at the photograph of st .
sir harry sighed , and looked at the villas mournfully .
it is what i gather from all that i have known of you .
“ have you heard from any bertolini people lately ?
he is already part of you .
“ ah , then you look into the court .
“ gentlewomen ?
“ that old man i told you about .
” shivered the tranquil air , and reminded her that she had told a lie and had never put it right .
fences are fences , especially when they are in the same place .
“ i believe that there was some misunderstanding , ” said mrs honeychurch uneasily .
never heard of it .
her mother must have returned from the station .
“ i only know what it is that’s wrong with him ;
she disliked confidences , for they might lead to self-knowledge and to that king of terrors light .
” said lucy , in a dull voice .
but he was apathetic and dilatory .
“ my advice , ” put in mrs honeychurch , “ is to have nothing to do with lucy and her decayed gentlewomen at all .
they were now in the newspaper-room at the english bank .
schumann was right for this evening .
mr beebe was walking up to the torre del gallo with the emersons and some american ladies .
let us put it down to his deplorable antecedents and education , if you wish .
come up to the house and let’s talk it over .
“ what i mean by subconscious is that emerson lost his head .
“ aha !
your father bought it and we must put up with it , will cecil kindly remember .
“ eh ?
our special joy was the father such a sentimental darling , and people declared he had murdered his wife .
he made an advantageous marriage .
“ i want so to see the arno .
“ naturally , dear .
do !
“ how delightful !
“ i i am very sorry .
“ oh , what have i done ?
“ and freddy minds .
to have stopped a week at windy corner and not to have met cissie and albert , the semi-detached villas that have been run up opposite the church !
“ no read away .
“ oh , splendid !
“ looking at italian art .
mr beebe saw that miss bartlett would be cold if she sat out , and that minnie would be dull if she sat in , so he proposed a division of forces .
i suppose it’s having him spoiling lucy’s first week at home ;
“ miss honeychurch !
how perfectly splendid of them to go abroad !
“ now , a clergyman that i do hate , ” said she wanting to say something sympathetic , “ a clergyman that does have fences , and the most dreadful ones , is mr eager , the english chaplain at florence .
he did not realize that lucy had consecrated her environment by the thousand little civilities that create a tenderness in time , and that though her eyes saw its defects , her heart refused to despise it entirely .
” he cried , and tried to catch her by the ankles .
“ i count myself a lucky person , ” he concluded , “ when i’m in london i feel i could never live out of it .
but though she had avoided the chief actor , the scenery unfortunately remained .
“ i have been worrying all the morning , and here comes the very thing .
“ no , ” cried lucy , remembering her grievance .
but he was infinitely tolerant of the young , and had no desire to snub george .
he has known so few women , and you have the time .
the name escaped her .
“ up to now i have never kissed you .
shall we look in the garden ?
i connect you with a view a certain type of view .
i see clearly .
oh , these honeychurches !
do you feel that , mrs honeychurch ?
it was the pension bertolini again , the dining-table with the decanters of water and wine .
in silence the two women watched him .
“ hush , dear !
of course , it was most unpleasant ;
listen to the wind among the pines !
you have no business to take them bathing in the sacred lake ;
” cried lucy , in growing excitement .
“ friends of mine ?
it is so dreadful for charlotte , being poor .
“ mean what , george ?
miss lavish , who represented intellect , was avowedly hostile , and now the miss alans , who stood for good breeding , were following her .
how month after month she became more eccentric and unreliable .
for italy was offering her the most priceless of all possessions her own soul .
“ i tell you who has no fences ,’ as you call them , ” she said , “ and that’s mr beebe .
that something or other mattered intellectually ?
“ let us go immediately , ” he told them .
“ very well , dear , you know best .
after all , there was no reason that lucy should talk about greece or thank him for persuading her mother , so he said good-bye .
“ i am very sorry about it , ” she said ;
it did happen like that , if it happened at all .
as a matter of fact , the storm was worst along the road ;
i shall go and say we are sorry .
“ no one will see lucy off , ” interposed mrs honeychurch .
he’s the type who’s kept europe back for a thousand years .
“ i knew you wouldn’t understand , ” said lucy quite crossly .
“ a try !
more like anderson .
“ she has none , ” said the young man , with grave sincerity .
lucy was suffering from the most grievous wrong which this world has yet discovered :
“ no , you don’t , ” she snapped .
of course , he has all his father’s mannerisms , and it is quite possible that he , too , may be a socialist .
“ oh , that’s nothing ;
but she , at once exclaimed in a high voice , “ oh , do tell me more about the miss alans !
there was a hint of the teacher about him .
as if one cares about that !
she flushed again and said :
they had come to a situation where character tells , and where childhood enters upon the branching paths of youth .
would she object to sitting in mr beebe’s study ?
“ do you know anything about miss lavish’s novel ?
yet surely she greeted it with disproportionate joy .
she had read in it of the crocuses which had been bought for yellow and were coming up puce , of the new parlour-maid , who had watered the ferns with essence of lemonade , of the semi-detached cottages which were ruining summer street , and breaking the heart of sir harry otway .
how the driver stares at us , dear , simple soul !
“ these particular emersons consisted of a father and a son the son a goodly , if not a good young man ;
and , miss bartlett not favouring the scheme , they walked up the hill in a silence which was only broken by the rector naming some fern .
“ you mustn’t say these things , ” said lucy softly .
“ the son of a labourer ;
do you know which is the tombstone that is praised in ruskin ?
mr beebe is hopeless .
“ freddy owes me fifteen shillings , ” interposed cecil .
one more fuss through with you , charlotte .
at the last minute , when the social machine was clogged hopelessly , one member or other of the family poured in a drop of oil .
it’s true that in nine cases out of ten they don’t seem to notice anything .
mr eager mumbled a temperate prayer .
tears of indignation came to lucy’s eyes partly because miss lavish had jilted her , partly because she had taken her baedeker .
that old man will do the neighbourhood a world of good .
for all his culture , cecil was an ascetic at heart , and nothing in his love became him like the leaving of it .
“ for instance , the driver .
“ oh , what have i done ?
it ceased , and they only heard the fair wind blowing the bracken and the trees .
hook me behind !
lucy sank back .
“ but you are , and there’s a look of george about you .
at a little distance stood minnie and the “ garden-child , ” a minute importation , each holding either end of a long piece of bass .
he saw , to his surprise , that she was apparently serious .
he might even have a high opinion of her .
“ then i will say no more .
“ and don’t move till i come back .
no .
“ why shouldn’t i be a baby ?
“ i liked him till just now .
oh , is our drive to come off ?
” but she was so unsympathetic that she must be reliable .
no one was at home except freddy and his friend , who had to stop their tennis and to entertain her for a solid hour .
and i i thought i was developing .
she moved feebly to the window , and tried to detect the cad’s white flannels among the laurels .
then she began to get tired .
i’m sorry about it .
though i hope i have not vexed sir harry otway .
i’m really not joking .
the situation was so glorious , the house so commonplace , not to say impertinent .
lucy , go and change your frock .
on the morrow the pool had shrunk to its old size and lost its glory .
men don’t .
” said lucy , and missed her stroke .
there !
there were a few streaks of bluish-green among the clouds , a few patches of watery light upon the earth , and then the dripping façade of san miniato shone brilliantly in the declining sun .
“ mr emerson , have you any brothers or sisters ?
healthy and muscular , he yet gave her the feeling of greyness , of tragedy that might only find solution in the night .
but its platforms were overflowing with italians , who preferred to stand .
“ have you looked at those saints ?
perhaps defeat was particularly mortifying for him .
she had complained of dullness , and lo !
neither he nor cecil enjoyed these open compliments to their sex .
he has rooms he does not value , and he thinks you would value them .
sit down , dear ;
and so will freddy .
they sank upon their knees , invisible from the road , they hoped , and began to whisper one another’s names .
this is what i call an adventure .
he was truly insincere not merely the manner unfortunate .
his brain recovered from the shock , and , in a burst of genuine devotion , he cried :
“ thank you , dear , for reminding me .
she wanted to leave florence , and when we got to rome she did not want to be in rome , and all the time i felt that i was spending her mother’s money .
“ it’s his third go , isn’t it ?
they were going to greece instead .
” but his correction passed unheeded .
she renewed it when the two carriages stopped , half into florence .
“ i have been into the dark , and i am going back into it , unless you will try to understand .
no smile came to his lips , and , changing the subject again , he said :
then the pernicious charm of italy worked on her , and , instead of acquiring information , she began to be happy .
it was no good being kind to miss bartlett .
and cecil was the kind of fellow who would never wear another fellow’s cap .
grant that , at any rate .
lucy paused .
an older person at such an hour and in such a place might think that sufficient was happening to him , and rest content .
she tore us apart twice , but in the rectory that evening she was given one more chance to make us happy .
mr beebe smiled as miss alan plunged into an anecdote which he knew she would be unable to finish in the presence of a gentleman .
sometimes he is so silly , and then i do not mind him .
“ here hand me the book .
“ go and dress , dear ;
he looked very attractive when his face was bright , and he dispelled her ridiculous forebodings at once .
i came across him at brixton .
“ italy .
the older people recovered quickly .
“ my dear lucy , it would be splendid .
it is really all right .
whatever you ask him he answers , yes or no ;
“ suppose we go and hinder those new people opposite for a little .
miss bartlett looked surprised , and said that she had not read the book , nor known that it was published ;
i hope i acted for the best .
“ the first evening means so much .
come , too .’ needless to say , i refused such an unsuitable invitation , and she had the impertinence to tell me that it would broaden my ideas , and said that she had four brothers , all university men , except one who was in the army , who always made a point of talking to commercial travellers .
lucy bit her lip , for the tone was sneering .
miss alan , i am going into the smoking-room to talk to those two nice men .
i really can’t stop .
” gasped miss lavish .
“ you may well wish that .
the scene suggested a swiss alp rather than the shrine and centre of a leisured world , and was marred only by two ugly little villas the villas that had competed with cecil’s engagement , having been acquired by sir harry otway the very afternoon that lucy had been acquired by cecil .
“ george , don’t go , ” cried his father , who thought it a great treat for people if his son would talk to them .
really i have not had rheumatism for years .
she joined her cousin .
“ i quite agree , ” said miss lavish , who had several times tried to interrupt his mordant wit .
” for the first time lucy’s rebellious thoughts swept out in words for the first time in her life .
“ i want something more definite , ” said lucy contemptuously .
i warned you about her ;
but she had been near danger , and so she thought it must be near to everyone .
every city , let me teach you , has its own smell .
he bent towards lucy with a look of interest , as if he had an important message for her .
cecil , this afternoon seemed such a twittering sparrow .
“ we find , though , that the miss alans were coming , and that we have turned them out .
but i wrote back at once , and i said :
“ why , he has behaved abominably , ” she said .
lucy did not know what to do nor even what she wanted to do .
i can go alone , thank you .
lucy soon lost interest in the discontent of lady louisa , and became discontented herself .
might she go to church ?
with many a smile she produced two of those mackintosh squares that protect the frame of the tourist from damp grass or cold marble steps .
but it gave them strength to drift into another piazza , large and dusty , on the farther side of which rose a black-and-white façade of surpassing ugliness .
“ it is natural , surely after such painful scenes that she should desire a change .
he admires you more than ever .
not otherwise .
instinctively he gave the curtains a twitch , and sent them swinging down their poles .
i shan’t let you carry it .
i don’t require you to fall in love with my boy , but i do think you might try and understand him .
“ he does not love me .
“ once a cad , always a cad .
“ i cannot tell why , but though all that you say sounds true , i feel that you are not treating me fairly .
“ lucy is becoming wonderful wonderful .
what does a girl do when she comes across a cad ?
his face lit up .
“ he died by the fountain , i believe , ” was her reply .
the better class of tourist was shocked at this , and sympathized with the new-comers .
“ i tell you i’m getting fairly sick .
miss bartlett gave a kind of wriggle , and he prepared for a discussion .
and gave himself up to the police !
tell him muddle .’ ” then she arranged her veil , while the tears poured over her cheeks inside .
a sigh , and they departed .
“ this meat has surely been used for soup , ” said miss bartlett , laying down her fork .
maple arriving at the door and depositing this chair , those varnished book-cases , that writing-table .
lucy , with one eye upon the weather , finally said that she thought the emersons were nice ;
poor little ladies !
“ it is terrible , this havoc among the flowers , ” he remarked .
of course , you knew her before .
“ we have tried to buy what cannot be bought with money .
he preferred to talk to lucy , whose playing he remembered , rather than to miss bartlett , who probably remembered his sermons .
he looked at lucy .
“ hush , dears , ” said mrs honeychurch , who found it impossible to remain shocked .
sit down till you are rested .
“ italians , dear , you know , ” said miss alan .
“ and old mrs butterworth the philanthropist ?
“ oh , miss honeychurch , that you should come !
why ?
therefore it must be the horse , who always expected people to walk up the hill in case they tired him .
and our boy had typhoid because no clergyman had dropped water on him in church !
she has been so generous to me ;
“ and you ?
yet lucy’s spirits should not have leapt up as if she had sighted the ramparts of heaven .
for a moment the two girls looked at each other .
for she would have stopped me going in , and he was the only person alive who could have made me see sense .
it would be wrong not to loathe that man .
“ let me light your candle , shall i ?
first you say don’t tell’ ;
” said lucy , forgetting her own affairs at last .
“ this is too much !
thus it was that , though she saw someone standing in the wet below , he , though he looked up , did not see her .
i hope you do not suppose that i came to join on to you .
“ do you indeed , dear ?
i heard you all bear-gardening , but there’s better fun up here .
but it is sometimes as difficult to lose one’s temper as it is difficult at other times to keep it .
mrs vyse was a nice woman , but her personality , like many another’s , had been swamped by london , for it needs a strong head to live among many people .
“ lucy !
it was heard all over the drawing-room , and silenced the guelfs and the ghibellines .
if you wish me to turn these gentlemen out of their rooms , i will do it .
it was useless to say to him , “ and would you ” and hope that he would complete the sentence for himself , averting his eyes from her nakedness like the knight in that beautiful picture .
he had helped himself , it is true , but how stupidly !
it is so disgusting , the way an engagement is regarded as public property a kind of waste place where every outsider may shoot his vulgar sentiment .
but not the parthenon , not the frieze of phidias at any price ;
hitherto truth had come to her naturally .
but in case she should blame you in any way , i promise i will not , i am very willing not to .
they had given up their attempt if it was one to conquer society , and now the father was almost as silent as the son .
lucy nodded .
i’ve heard him lecture on giotto .
she was determined to be gracious to them , beautiful rather than delicate , and , if possible , to erase miss bartlett’s civility by some gracious reference to the pleasant rooms .
the loggia showed as the triple entrance of a cave , wherein many a deity , shadowy , but immortal , looking forth upon the arrivals and departures of mankind .
dream of that .
i must face it without getting muddled .
“ oh , that reminds me you never told me what charlotte said in her letter .
mr beebe’s house was near the church .
god bless you , lucy !
teresa was very much annoyed , and left the table before the cheese , saying as she did so :
i believe you keep up with miss lavish .
in mr eager’s mouth it resembled nothing so much as an acid whistling fountain which played ever higher and higher , and quicker and quicker , and more and more shrilly , till abruptly it was turned off with a click .
“ very much , ” he replied , but there was a note of offence in his voice ;
why should lucy want either to marry or to travel when she had such friends at home ?
“ because ” a phrase came to her , and she accepted it “ you’re the sort who can’t know any one intimately .
“ try the jam , ” freddy was saying .
the dear george , now striding towards them over the tombstones , seemed both pitiable and absurd .
but italy had quickened cecil , not to tolerance , but to irritation .
” she asked him .
the spirit of the generations had smiled through them , rejoicing in the engagement of cecil and lucy because it promised the continuance of life on earth .
to-morrow we will make a change .
its rays fell on the ladies whenever they advanced towards the bedroom windows ;
the feeling soon passed ;
“ one is very thankful that she has such a resource .
but mr eager proceeded to tell miss honeychurch that on the right lived mr someone something , an american of the best type so rare !
“ and what is it ?
“ don’t listen to him , sir harry he’s tiresome .
“ really .
“ my father , ” he said , “ is in his bath , so you cannot thank him personally .
“ anyhow , those are my reasons for not being your wife .
lucy , who wanted to see santa croce , suggested , as a possible solution , that they should ask the way there .
” she was very sorry that she had asked him .
“ life’ wrote a friend of mine , is a public performance on the violin , in which you must learn the instrument as you go along .’ i think he puts it well .
“ in the presence of reality that kind of person invariably breaks down .
“ you and i , dear boy , will lie at peace in the earth that bore us , and our names will disappear as surely as our work survives .
he was a member of the residential colony who had made florence their home .
how interesting !
“ yes , i have .
but who looks at it to-day ?
i expect that you have forgotten us :
or would you have told me to go , and dealt with a tremendous thing so lightly ?
it doesn’t prevent me from realizing the truth .
he has bought cissie and albert from mr flack !
“ but here you are as safe as in england .
“ i love weather like this , ” said freddy .
“ who may miss lavish be ?
” said cecil , uncertain whether the remark was striking or not .
yes , he was disappointed .
“ my dear , i am worried about you .
“ this has been a day and a half .
he perceived that these new tenants might be of value educationally .
cecil must have his reading and anything else that he liked .
why should he invite us in that absurd manner ?
then freddy used to bathe there .
there were too many ghosts about .
a grave voice replied , “ hullo !
it had been a call to the blood and to the relaxed will , a passing benediction whose influence did not pass , a holiness , a spell , a momentary chalice for youth .
cecil crumbled his bread .
really , charlotte was outdoing herself .
“ i’m not defending them , ” said lucy , losing her courage , and relapsing into the old chaotic methods .
quick !
exactly .
“ turn her out , ” said cecil bravely .
i know all about it .
then lucy realized that they had mistaken machiavelli for some saint , hoping to acquire virtue .
how am i to get out of it ?
“ beware !
“ lucy lucy what a nuisance i am !
a few minutes before you came in .
please do not put private’ outside your envelope again .
“ you’re shocked , but i mean to shock you .
cecil , whom the cry had not awoke , snored .
it was intolerable that she should disbelieve him .
with that outlook it should have been a successful room , but the trail of tottenham court road was upon it ;
“ remember , ” he was saying , “ the facts about this church of santa croce ;
this tired one .
he tied the horse to a tree , kicked it to make it stay quiet , dusted the carriage , arranged his hair , remoulded his hat , encouraged his moustache , and in rather less than a quarter of a minute was ready to conduct her .
lucy !
so shocked and so pleased .
in the case of lucy , the feeling was intensified through dislike of cecil ;
but the coolness remained , and , for lucy , was even increased when she opened the letter and read as follows .
i’m glad i’ve told you ;
george whooped in their faces , turned and scudded away down the path to the pond , still clad in mr beebe’s hat .
mr beebe followed .
whoever is it ?
she was perfectly sure that there had been a second tourist of whom the same story had been told .
“ found the lost ball ?
unless lucy would at all like to go out ?
“ oh , i see , dear poetry .
her emotion relaxed , she modified her embrace a little , and she said :
mr beebe , without consulting mr eager , had doubled the size of the party .
the little old lady shook her head , and sighed disapprovingly .
she tried to remember her emotions in florence :
she had tried herself too often and too recently .
and poor lucy serve her right worn to a shadow .
“ freddy has told us .
if my father was alive , i am sure he would vote radical again now that ireland is all right .
“ i never could play .
“ it is dreadful to be entangled with low-class people .
let’s all go .
it should forget civility and consideration and all the other curses of a refined nature .
they have sinned against passion and truth , and vain will be their strife after virtue .
yes do .
she saw the emersons after church .
miss bartlett read the letter in silence , laid it down , seemed to hesitate , and then read it again .
i have reflected .
i’ll see .
it was not his habit to leave her in doubt as to his meaning .
“ nonsense with that sock .
then he took up his work again , too shy to say what the bother was .
leaving him to be annoyed , she gazed at the black head again .
yells , and widening circles over the dappled earth .
miss bartlett’s recent liberalism oozed away at the question .
“ lucy , what a noise you’re making !
the clergyman was conscious of some bitter disappointment which he could not keep out of his voice .
not a step , not a twig , was unimportant to her .
you will never repent of a little civility to your inferiors .
“ you ?
you shall go with the two gentlemen , and i and eleanor will follow behind .
“ the same as lucy’s got .
it’s floyd’s last day .
“ i don’t see how mr beebe comes in .
and if i got there i should like my friends to lean out of it , just as they do here .
” she exclaimed “ oh , cecil , do tell me !
“ no , i didn’t suppose you would care to much .
that’s the second murderer i’ve heard of as being there .
extra facilities please tell them they shall have extra facilities , for i shall have no agents’ fees .
“ were you snubbed ?
“ lucy !
he had nothing to say .
“ how ?
as she groped she murmured :
i hope that you have not been put to any great inconvenience .
“ why didn’t you talk , lucy ?
“ what do you know about lucy or girls or anything ?
a look of contempt came over him , and he said , “ why not ?
“ then i don’t fetch your photographs .
she got up from the grass .
rather a hard voice said :
“ all the same , she is a little too i hardly like to say unwomanly , but she behaved most strangely when the emersons arrived .
“ if you’ll let me say so , i am very glad , and i am certain that you have done the right thing .
i think i shall go mad .
at the hint of opposition she warmed .
she walked about disdainfully , unwilling to be enthusiastic over monuments of uncertain authorship or date .
gibbon .
lucy began to cry with anger , and though her anger passed away soon , her tears remained .
he rose when she spoke , and began to dust his knees .
at tea a misfortune took place :
you know the proverb ?
miss bartlett was startled .
i revel in shaking off the trammels of respectability , as you know .
what was his name ?
she began to redden , and pretended to examine the windows again .
lucy was frightened .
“ you love the boy body and soul , plainly , directly , as he loves you , and no other word expresses it .
always complaisant , he put the letter away .
fortunately miss lavish was a match for any one .
miss bartlett could not think .
we might go up by fiesole and back by settignano .
no business of ours , said cecil , glancing at lucy , who was all parasol and evidently “ minded .
i trust that neither of you was at all that it was not in your immediate proximity ?
beside them walked officers , looking foolish and fierce , and before them went little boys , turning somersaults in time with the band .
“ i want to ask you something before we go in .
” and he thumped with his fists like a naughty child , and turned to his son , saying , “ george , persuade them !
you need all the rest you can get .
she rose without his assistance , and though wings seemed to flutter inside her , she walked firmly enough towards the arno .
” she took hold of her guest by the arm .
lucy said , “ he seems in better spirits .
“ giotto they got that at florence , i’ll be bound .
his tortured garden was bright with geraniums and lobelias and polished shells .
she addressed herself to the drivers , who were sprawling in the carriages , perfuming the cushions with cigars .
he said imperiously :
“ however , we shall see him when he sees you off .
my attitude quite an indefensible one is that so long as i am no trouble to any one i have a right to do as i like .
i haven’t any about men .
if you help we may succeed .
“ my good lucia , i am all at sea .
i wonder yes i wonder how he has the effrontery to look me in the face , to dare to claim acquaintance with me .
andate via !
“ my father , ” said he , “ saw her , and i prefer his word .
his heavy , tired breathing was the only reply ;
happy charlotte , who , though greatly troubled over things that did not matter , seemed oblivious to things that did ;
and cecil was welcome to bring whom he would into the neighbourhood .
the best obtainable .
“ i am about to venture a suggestion .
“ perhaps he’s tired .
“ no , he doesn’t .
observe how giotto in these frescoes now , unhappily , ruined by restoration is untroubled by the snares of anatomy and perspective .
it doesn’t spread so .
the armies are full of pleasant and pious folk .
they were so very kind .
“ gone under naturally .
italian in the mouth of italians is a deep-voiced stream , with unexpected cataracts and boulders to preserve it from monotony .
when i’m in the country i feel the same about the country .
pretty cottages lined it on two sides , and the upper and third side was occupied by a new stone church , expensively simple , a charming shingled spire .
for the five-franc note she should substitute a young lady , which would raise the tone of the tragedy , and at the same time furnish an excellent plot .
and he was willing to go further to place her out of danger until she could confirm her resolution of virginity .
she thought that her advice had impressed him and that he was thanking her for it .
for i repeat and i insist , and i have always held most strongly , that a tragedy such as yesterday’s is not the less tragic because it happened in humble life .
a few minutes ago she had been all high spirits , talking as a woman of culture , and half persuading herself that she was full of originality .
a gentleman is such a stand-by .
“ i don’t know that you aren’t .
it tasted partly of the paper in which it was wrapped , partly of hair oil , partly of the great unknown .
lucy asked her brother whether cecil was in .
that from the very first moment we met , she hoped , far down in her mind , that we should be like this of course , very far down .
oh !
francis came floating round the partition wall .
“ what fun , cecil !
but therefore therefore i settled to fight him .
“ what do you mean ?
“ i should have ” she checked herself , and broke the sentence off .
” he closed his eyes .
“ i shall enjoy hearing your father talk again .
” he pleaded .
as for the son , i am sorry for him when we meet , rather than for myself .
“ yes or no , please ;
a pension is a bad place for gossips .
“ it’s i who am tiresome , ” he replied .
“ really ” he murmured gallantly , though he saw the wisdom of her remark .
all right , freddy i am not being clever , upon my word i am not i took the idea from another fellow ;
“ did freddy say whether he was driving straight back ?
perhaps he was shy , perhaps he was friendly , or perhaps he thought that george’s face wanted washing .
but independence was certainly her cue .
“ how tiresome !
“ oh , dear , lucy !
lady helen laverstock is at present busy over fra angelico .
“ one minute , mother .
he could not imagine it as a natural birthright , that might grow heavenward like flowers .
“ cecil cecil darling , ” she whispered the evening she arrived , and crept into his arms .
” she meant “ to see miss lavish , ” but when he bent down to the grass without replying , it struck her that she could mean something else .
nature simplest of topics , he thought lay around them .
“ we are radicals , too , out and out .
“ now , charlotte !
“ but her music !
i don’t remember .
for a moment the visible world faded away , and memories and emotions alone seemed real .
nor cecil , charlotte , owing to you .
her attitude was :
not why it is .
“ because it is the room i had , and i had your father’s room .
no .
” but she answered dreamily , “ i bathed here , too , till i was found out .
your mother will see this as clearly as i do , when you tell her .
“ the truth is , dear , you don’t like charlotte .
here the voice of miss bartlett was heard saying that a crowd had begun to collect .
“ bow , lucy ;
“ i wish one word with you in the drawing-room , mr emerson , please .
” he appealed to lucy .
it was as joyful to be forgiven past unworthinesses as to forgive them .
“ yes , easily .
they left the pool in silence , after this one salutation .
she believes in justice and truth and human interest .
i have no sisters or and i don’t understand these things .
but it is so difficult .
girls like lucy were charming to look at , but mr beebe was , from rather profound reasons , somewhat chilly in his attitude towards the other sex , and preferred to be interested rather than enthralled .
some complicated game had been playing up and down the hillside all the afternoon .
though life is very glorious , it is difficult .
were you indeed ?
but they have yielded to the only enemy that matters the enemy within .
“ oh , mr beebe , have you heard the news ?
she was anxious to show that she was not shy , and was glad that he did not seem shy either .
whether she would have dared to do this was never proved .
“ she has accepted me , ” he said , and the sound of the thing in english made him flush and smile with pleasure , and look more human .
“ i must actually thank you for what you have done for showing me what i really am .
have you seen the young one yet ?
“ yes .
“ the railway !
they had gathered round george , who beckoned , she felt , over the rubbish , the sloppy thoughts , the furtive yearnings that were beginning to cumber her soul .
they have to-day .
i’ll put a marvel to you .
mr beebe pulled himself together .
“ cousin of one of my parishioners .
it was ordinary water , nor was there very much of it , and , as freddy said , it reminded one of swimming in a salad .
lucy never knew her desires so clearly as after music .
“ i hadn’t time to think .
isn’t it romance ?
he thanked her , but the walk sounded rather far ;
a rebel she was , but not of the kind he understood a rebel who desired , not a wider dwelling-room , but equality beside the man she loved .
“ well , it isn’t everyone who could boast such a conquest , dearest , is it ?
who was to sit on the other ?
the wood , then , ” said lucy , startled at his queerness , but pretty sure that he would explain later ;
good taste and bad taste were only catchwords , garments of diverse cut ;
george looked up .
“ the jam’s jolly good .
but they had cast a spell over her .
“ here’s mr beebe .
that man had a decided feeling for landscape .
how she gave you no peace ;
” she looked at her gloves critically .
“ it’s impossible .
he pointed with his racquet to the south downs .
” she paused again , to be sure of doing justice to cecil’s profundity .
i think , though , that this is the last .
“ a view ?
her cousin again repressed her .
“ all the same , i don’t think much harm would have come of accepting .
the creature grows degenerate .
then she had a letter from miss bartlett .
“ exactly !
“ come down , o maid , from yonder mountain height ,’ ” he quoted , and touched her knee with his own .
mr beebe was back , saying rather nervously :
italians are born knowing the way .
i said :
miss bartlett uttered a cry of genuine alarm .
“ oh , yes , you do think it .
she had no idea that it would be such a dreadful answer , or she would not have asked him .
” the thought that she , as well as the dying man , had crossed some spiritual boundary .
“ i believed in a return to nature once .
so it was at the rectory , when i met you both again ;
diplomatic advantage had been taken of her sincerity , of her craving for sympathy and love .
a .
miss bartlett , in her room , fastened the window-shutters and locked the door , and then made a tour of the apartment to see where the cupboards led , and whether there were any oubliettes or secret entrances .
“ undoubtedly he was , ” said miss bartlett .
“ you think you’re so holy and truthful , but really it’s only abominable conceit .
and yet you will tell me that the sexes are equal .
they were close to their pension .
“ what do you mean by a new voice ?
i was not meant to understand it .
“ oh , i had no idea !
she nodded .
glancing at his hand , in case any of freddy’s chemicals had come off on it , he moved to the writing table .
lucy turned to the piano and struck a few chords .
“ what is the heroine’s name ?
“ i can’t find them now , and i don’t want to either .
now i’ll cross-question you .
miss lavish was so original .
the pension bertolini had decided , almost enthusiastically , that they would do .
“ my dear girl , no ;
“ a smell !
“ i nearly fainted myself , ” he said ;
behind cecil’s back as we were walking up the garden .
light entered .
if you will not think me rude , we residents sometimes pity you poor tourists not a little handed about like a parcel of goods from venice to florence , from florence to rome , living herded together in pensions or hotels , quite unconscious of anything that is outside baedeker , their one anxiety to get done’ or through’ and go on somewhere else .
” he quavered ;
“ oh , rubbish !
“ don’t let us spoil yours , ” he continued to lucy .
“ have they gone ?
if they get drunk , there’s an end of them they lie down comfortably and sleep it off .
(gracious , how plain you look !) put it under the atlas to press .
“ it’s only another muddle of freddy’s .
” and the letter went on to say :
“ no discussion .
“ why need mother hear of it ?
decidedly .
“ what is that ?
and , in any case , we are infinitely safer than if we were walking .
“ apparently .
the sky , you know , was gold , and the ground all blue , and for a moment he looked like someone in a book .
“ yes !
“ don’t be a prig , ” said her uncle arthur .
“ i wrote to miss teresa a few days ago she was wondering how often the butcher called , and my reply of once a month must have impressed her favourably .
some of their neighbours interchanged glances , and one of them one of the ill-bred people whom one does meet abroad leant forward over the table and actually intruded into their argument .
“ no line .
at present her great aim was not to get put into it .
it must be something i can’t understand .
into what a grotesque mistake had he fallen !
hitherto she had accepted their ideals without questioning their kindly affluence , their inexplosive religion , their dislike of paper-bags , orange-peel , and broken bottles .
one might laugh at the house , but one never shuddered .
“ oh , how do you do , mr beebe ?
he will not tell .
she would see the fun of it , and some of its beauty , for she must see some beauty .
“ it would be a perfect paradise for a bank clerk .
i admit it’s horrid of me .
at the time he had given surreptitious tugs to the string himself .
don’t you think so ?
then his words rose gravely over hers :
that would never do .
i do not want to call in mr vyse .
“ haven’t i ?
so she did want to talk about her broken engagement .
“ miss lavish has led your cousin astray .
why not ?
“ charlotte , don’t you feel , too , that we might be in london ?
from her feet the ground sloped sharply into view , and violets ran down in rivulets and streams and cataracts , irrigating the hillside with blue , eddying round the tree stems collecting into pools in the hollows , covering the grass with spots of azure foam .
“ courage !
my admirer will hardly trouble me again .
why shouldn’t you connect me with a room ?
” he started into the present .
pray the saints she might not arrive too late .
it was necessary to use his muscles .
oh , you are watching for the torre del gallo party .
when the guests were gone , and lucy had gone to bed , mrs vyse paced up and down the drawing-room , discussing her little party with her son .
“ very well indeed .
so it was as well that miss bartlett should tap and come in , and having commented on lucy’s leaving the door unlocked , and on her leaning out of the window before she was fully dressed , should urge her to hasten herself , or the best of the day would be gone .
cecil will never hear .
he was interested in the sudden friendship between women so apparently dissimilar as miss bartlett and miss lavish .
they were his specialty , and his profession had provided him with ample opportunities for the work .
“ surely he could answer her civilly for one half-hour ?
no comforts or proper provisions .
lucy faced the situation bravely , though , like most of us , she only faced the situation that encompassed her .
“ the misses alan aren’t that !
at the next flash , lucy screamed also .
“ dead , miss bartlett , dead .
“ if i did not wear my best rags and tatters now , when should i wear them ?
i have to .
miss bartlett pecked her smartly on both cheeks , wished her good-night , and sent her to her own room .
” was her cordial reply .
they must find their level .
“ yes i have said yes’ already .
mr beebe was saying that italians know everything , but i think they are rather childish .
“ i met sir harry otway as i came up ;
” tapping phaethon’s back with her guide-book , she said , “ silenzio !
“ not in that way .
you do well to bathe .
” said lucy , who had been further saddened by the signora’s unexpected accent .
“ i do not expect we shall go any further than athens , but if you knew of a really comfortable pension at constantinople , we should be so grateful .
she and miss lavish had had an adventure also .
freddy and mr floyd were obliged to hunt for a lost ball in the laurels , but the other two acquiesced .
mr beebe smiled nonchalantly .
he’s well connected .
” said the old man hotly .
“ what is it about ?
they walked rapidly , taking the short cuts , and reached the summit while the carriage was still pursuing the windings of the road .
piano !
charlotte was most annoyed at finding me practically alone , and so i couldn’t help being a little annoyed with miss lavish .
music seemed to her the employment of a child .
others are lost .
“ i simply must go away .
you and charlotte trying to divide two apples among three people last night might be sisters .
the garden-child , who did not know what bass was , stood rooted to the path with horror .
“ dear , no doubt you’re right as usual , but you are in no position to argue .
“ how dreadful !
after all , i do believe that birds and trees and the sky are the most wonderful things in life , and that the people who live amongst them must be the best .
“ mr emerson !
beware of women altogether .
when it came to the point , it was she who remembered the past , she into whose soul the iron had entered , she who knew whose room this had been last year .
“ mr emerson , ” cried the girl , “ don’t leave at least , not on my account .
do you know about that ?
“ to me it seemed perfectly appalling , disastrous , portentous .
she watched him steal up-stairs , while the shadows from three banisters passed over her face like the beat of wings .
he watched the lecturer , whose success he believed he had impaired , and then he anxiously watched his son .
he had spent money , and yet summer street was spoilt as much as ever .
he prefers young people , i’m sure .
“ if books must be written , let them be written by men ” ;
“ from your own account , you told her as much .
but to discuss it afterwards , to pass from discussion into silence , and through silence into sympathy , that is an error , not of a startled emotion , but of the whole fabric .
the line was unexpected .
of course , he despised the world as a whole ;
never in the real country like this .
can you picture a lady who has been introduced to another lady by a third lady opening civilities with how do you do ?
“ how like charlotte to undo her work by a feeble muddle at the last moment .
“ here , lennie , the bass , ” cried mrs honeychurch .
he seemed to be smiling across something .
indoors herself , partaking of tea with old mrs butterworth , she reflected that it is impossible to foretell the future with any degree of accuracy , that it is impossible to rehearse life .
“ so , miss honeychurch , you are travelling ?
it is that , more or less .
perhaps i oughtn’t to have discussed her so freely with any one ;
well educated , well endowed , and not deficient physically , he remained in the grip of a certain devil whom the modern world knows as self-consciousness , and whom the medieval , with dimmer vision , worshipped as asceticism .
she had fallen on to a little open terrace , which was covered with violets from end to end .
never heard of it .
i thought it abominably selfish of you .
“ let me introduce mr honeychurch , whose sister you will remember at florence .
“ i’d rather go through the wood , ” said cecil , with that subdued irritation that she had noticed in him all the afternoon .
you are far too good to me .
he alone had divined what things were , and what he wished them to be .
it is such a pleasure to have met you !
there is a point on that road where we could get down and have an hour’s ramble on the hillside .
a judgement !
“ i tore the thing up .
by-the-by , we really must ask charlotte here some time .
one might lay up treasure in heaven by the attempt , but one enriched neither miss bartlett nor any one else upon earth .
“ would you take them into the garden and tell mrs honeychurch all about it ?
he longed to hint to her that not here lay her vocation ;
it was a new one from smith’s library .
but , as the week wore on , more of her defences fell , and she entertained an image that had physical beauty .
george emerson had kept the subject strangely pure .
i thought it might amuse you all .
it is a great secret , but i am glad to say that she is writing another novel .
it was the face of a saint who understood .
rush up and down and round the world , and come back as thin as a lath with the bad food .
“ it is of the highest importance that there should be no gossip in summer street .
i have been frightened of him .
“ greece ” and she saw that he was thinking the word over “ greece ;
“ minnie , don’t you listen to her .
lucy had a spasm of envy .
he added to his kindness .
oh , dears , look away !
” she repeated .
charlotte had once explained to her why .
freddy was neither clever , nor subtle , nor beautiful , and what prevented cecil from saying , any minute , “ it would be wrong not to loathe freddy ” ?
i can’t explain her any other way .
his brow contracted .
i tell you they shall be comrades , and george thinks the same .
she regarded him as a kind thing , but quite silly .
say , poppa , what did we see at rome ?’ and the father replies :
“ signorino , domani faremo uno giro , ” called the cabman , with engaging certainty .
“ when does the train to rome go ?
“ the scene is laid in florence ,’ ” repeated cecil , with an upward note .
lucy !
ladies are certainly different .
why should he appeal to lucy ?
mr eager would never come to the point .
let’s tell her .
lucy did remember , and how she had suggested that george should collect postage stamps .
it doesn’t do to injure young people .
you are leaving the man you love ?
“ dove buoni uomini ?
“ just a line from freddy .
“ it will not last , this cheerfulness .
“ you wouldn’t stop us this second time if you understood , ” he said .
“ i have carefully thought things over .
we know that we come from the winds , and that we shall return to them ;
she tried to tell cecil even now when they were laughing about some beautiful lady who had smitten his heart at school .
miss bartlett sedulously denied disapproving of any one , and added “ i am afraid you are finding me a very depressing companion .
he tried to change the subject ;
we expect to be married in january .
“ and she agreed that baptism was nothing , but he caught that fever when he was twelve and she turned round .
i want you in the room , of course .
it was new to her to be conscious of it .
“ are there two ways ?
” shouted mr beebe , remembering that after all he was in his own parish .
but why should this make us unhappy ?
sir harry is the essence of that garden-party .
“ that will mean another carriage .
she ought to have gone before the contract was signed .
she laughed faintly , “ half a minute would be nearer .
why did you tell miss lavish , when you wouldn’t even let me tell mother ?
come into my room , and i will give a good brush to your hair .
but miss lavish , with a shriek of dismay , dragged her forward , declaring that they were out of their path now by at least a mile .
“ mr beebe has just been scolding me for my suspicious nature .
“ i suppose so .
on account of the rains , the waters had flooded the surrounding grass , which showed like a beautiful emerald path , tempting these feet towards the central pool .
but you are not really .
there’s nothing worse than a muddle in all the world .
” and , though nothing is perfect , lucy felt for the moment that her mother and windy corner and the weald in the declining sun were perfect .
he repeated any rubbish that came into his head .
“ anything good in freddy’s letter ?
“ stop a minute ;
mrs vyse recessed to bed .
however , we shall be much more comfortable at the vyses’ hotel .
“ italy has done it .
“ i may have said that in the past .
mr emerson , if you could come with your son we should be so pleased .
and the haze in the valley increased the difficulty of the quest .
“ because i settled with cecil not to announce it until i left england .
“ i hope so , ” replied the young man , shifting his eyes to the ceiling .
“ i should be told , dear , that i am unsympathetic .
in vain she tried to check , or at all events to accelerate , the tale .
“ exactly .
lucy , for the third time , said that poor charlotte would be sopped .
as she spoke , she pulled off her rings , of which she wore several , and ranged them upon the pin cushion .
she went up to the dripping window and strained her eyes into the darkness .
miss lavish bristled .
“ my mother , i was meaning .
across something .
but mr emerson was only half interested .
he diverted it as follows :
he could not expect to master the details of so big a change in a girl’s life .
then she saw her brother’s face .
“ what a weathercock sir harry is , ” said lucy quietly .
“ very well , ” said charlotte , with a choky abruptness that was new to him , though familiar to lucy .
“ she was stopping with us .
a crowd rose out of the dusk .
“ about old mr emerson i hardly know .
“ here’s a mess :
it isn’t possible to love and to part .
he met us by chance in the national gallery , and arranged everything about this delightful house .
“ he may be killed !
not a word would come to her lips .
” she was silent .
“ the style of her !
he would belong to a brainless club , and his wife would give brainless dinner parties .
“ go and put on your boots .
her refusal had been clear and gentle ;
lucy bent forward and said with gentleness :
peter to match all of which would have cost less in london .
” he wanted to live now , to win at tennis , to stand for all he was worth in the sun the sun which had begun to decline and was shining in her eyes ;
is this possible ?
lucy thought she had never seen anything more beautiful ;
“ good-night , mr emerson .
“ please , i’d rather stop here with you .
she was rejoicing in her escape from dullness .
“ what does he say ?
now , this is what i call an adventure .
he praised the pine-woods , the deep lasts of bracken , the crimson leaves that spotted the hurt-bushes , the serviceable beauty of the turnpike road .
a leaf , violently agitated , danced past her , while other leaves lay motionless .
“ this is indeed a joyous day !
a delicate pathos perfumed her disconnected remarks , giving them unexpected beauty , just as in the decaying autumn woods there sometimes rise odours reminiscent of spring .
she was going to answer , “ no , ” when it struck her that she did mind , so she answered , “ yes .
“ i don’t know , ” gasped lucy .
“ it is being certain that lucy cares for me really .
” inside , the lecturer’s voice faltered , as well it might .
she only felt that the candle would burn better , the packing go easier , the world be happier , if she could give and receive some human love .
he practically put it like this :
wasted plans , wasted money , wasted love , and she had wounded her mother .
her reply was inadequate .
then freddy hurled one of the thunderbolts of youth .
“ that’ll do !
it was impossible to snub any one so gross .
it was another of those dreadful engagement calls .
i don’t think we ought to blame him very much .
“ though , as a matter of fact , coincidences are much rarer than we suppose .
two italians by the loggia had been bickering about a debt .
his belief in celibacy , so reticent , so carefully concealed beneath his tolerance and culture , now came to the surface and expanded like some delicate flower .
“ we all have our limitations , i suppose , ” said wise lucy .
“ i am , as it were , ” she concluded , “ the chaperon of my young cousin , lucy , and it would be a serious thing if i put her under an obligation to people of whom we know nothing .
you can transmute love , ignore it , muddle it , but you can never pull it out of you .
there was an explosion up the road .
“ it is impossible , ” murmured lucy , and then , remembering the experiences of her own heart , she said :
mrs honeychurch , who hated all changes , did mind , but not nearly as much as her daughter pretended , and only for the minute .
“ no , lucy , he stands for all that is bad in country life .
but if it did come to that how lucy would enjoy it !
but you were to be married this year , i thought .
ah , the world is too much for us .
mrs honeychurch , with more gravity than usual , and with more feeling than she usually permitted herself , replied :
do you know sir harry otway a radical if ever there was ?
there you are , and yet you talk of coincidence and fate .
it was as restful as sleeping .
honeychurch .
” but something in the dying evening , in the roar of the river , in their very embrace warned them that her words fell short of life , and george whispered :
you are nearer his age , and if you let yourself go i am sure you are sensible .
“ believe me , “ your anxious and loving cousin , “ charlotte .
you saw her , didn’t you , at rome and in the alps .
but , oh goodness !
“ oh , mr beebe , ” said miss alan , divided between awe and mirth .
” tampering with the truth , she forgot that the truth had ever been .
light and beauty enveloped her .
lucy , in the midst of her success , found time to wish they did .
“ come for a walk with me , ” he told her .
do play tennis with us , just this once .
“ here ” was the british museum .
within , the glory , though visible , was tempered to the capacities of man .
he fell heavily upon the prelate’s upturned toes .
“ what name ?
“ miss bartlett , ” he cried , “ it’s all right about the rooms .
a little deferentially , they splashed george .
they assented .
he had ascended it , that diligent and rather obscure master , possibly with an eye to business , possibly for the joy of ascending .
how cruel she would be to a man like that !
the luxury of self-exposure kept her almost happy through the long evening .
a tram roared by in the dark , and lucy felt unaccountably sad , though she had long since dried her eyes .
but i suppose it is only their personal charms that makes you defend them .
“ i was hoping that he was nice ;
violets , like other things , existed in great profusion there ;
“ oh , you relieve me , ” said miss bartlett .
miss honeychurch assented .
none of them dared or was able to be serious any more .
lucy could not get cross .
“ i am afraid it has been a bothersome business , ” he said gently .
mr beebe was right .
“ no one knows .
“ how angry he is with his father about the rooms !
somehow the emersons were different .
“ really ?
all he could do now was to find a desirable tenant for “ cissie ” someone really desirable .
“ i’ve come for tea and for gossip .
that a woman’s power and charm reside in mystery , not in muscular rant .
i like the old father , and look forward to seeing him again .
” said mr beebe sharply .
i am only saying what has happened .
“ i will not spoil the set .
my dear sister loves flowers ,’ it began .
” called his mother .
pardon me for suggesting that you have caught the habit .
it was a suitable speech , but she was more angry than sorry , and her voice showed it .
cecil found his companion interesting .
i know that lucy likes your son , because she tells me everything , and she wrote to me from rome when he asked her first .’ no , i’ll cross that last bit out it looks patronizing .
she had done wrong she admitted it , she only hoped that she had not done harm ;
“ yes , but won’t you tell me now what you would have done ?
the whole life of the south was disorganized , and the most graceful nation in europe had turned into formless lumps of clothes .
” said miss teresa , the more acute and less kindly of the two sisters .
men , declaring that she inspires them to it , move joyfully over the surface , having the most delightful meetings with other men , happy , not because they are masculine , but because they are alive .
mr beebe , who wore the heated aspect of a neutral , was bidden to collect the factions for the return home .
“ oh , lucy , but that is brave of you !
once , you know , i said that i liked my own playing better than any one’s .
as to the true italy he does not even dream of it .
the child screamed frantically at these words , and at these dreadful people who picked him up , dusted him , rubbed his bruises , and told him not to be superstitious .
“ i was saying , why should you trust her when she deceived you ?
miss bartlett had asked mr george emerson what his profession was , and he had answered “ the railway .
i’m quite uneasy at being always right so often .
he did not wish their cause to be championed by a young girl :
her love to lucy .
“ it is true .
“ no , to laugh at it .
“ where are the photographs ?
he will do admirably .
do !
not till mrs flack had laid the foundation stone , and the apparition of red and cream brick began to rise did he take alarm .
“ it is indeed , ” replied the girl , with a gravity that sounded sympathetic .
you remember that church at florence ?
for a dreadful thing had happened :
“ oh , what have i done ?
“ saturn doesn’t bounce .
she is kind to everyone , and yet lucy makes this difficulty when we try to give her some little return .
what do you mean ?
she pretended not to mind , but she could have screamed with temper .
i tell things so badly ;
a really comfortable pension at constantinople !’ so they call it out of decency , but in their hearts they want a pension with magic windows opening on the foam of perilous seas in fairyland forlorn !
miss lavish laid her hand pleasantly on lucy’s arm , as if to suggest that she , at all events , would get full marks .
“ i’ve seen the world so little i felt so out of things in italy .
cecil entered .
she fixed her eyes wistfully on the tower of the palace , which rose out of the lower darkness like a pillar of roughened gold .
and she had seen too many seasons , too many cities , too many men , for her abilities , and even with cecil she was mechanical , and behaved as if he was not one son , but , so to speak , a filial crowd .
” it was now time for him to wave his hat at the approaching trio .
you are young , dears , and however clever young people are , and however many books they read , they will never guess what it feels like to grow old .
it is odd how we of that pension , who seemed such a fortuitous collection , have been working into one another’s lives .
“ failed to make you happy ;
“ piano !
on mr beebe down at summer street as he smiled over a letter from miss catharine alan ;
“ then why didn’t he leave the room ?
she made the long , convincing speech that she had made to mr beebe , and intended to make to the world when she announced that her engagement was no more .
i can’t marry you , and you will thank me for saying so some day .
shopping was the topic that now ensued .
this was perfectly true .
you want someone younger and stronger and more in sympathy with you .
you’re tired , lucy .
and you know how clergymen generally laugh ;
“ quite so .
to be driven by lovers a king might envy us , and if we part them it’s more like sacrilege than anything i know .
“ temper !
“ cecil , do read the thing about the view .
she rebuked him , permitted him and revered him ever after for his manliness .
i told you not saturn .
the way of all flesh .
sono occupato !
her mother bent over her .
was there more in her frank beauty than met the eye the power , perhaps , to evoke passions , good and bad , and to bring them speedily to a fulfillment ?
yet how difficult it is !
it hid this extraordinary man from her , and bore him away to the fountain .
i shall never be able to talk to your friends , or behave as a wife of yours should .
“ i wish i wasn’t such a fool , mr beebe .
he has a view too .
“ pass !
he had never fathomed miss bartlett .
i wonder if she will approve of mr beebe .
you have put me in a most awkward position .
the audience shifted uneasily , and so did lucy .
“ what a splendid idea !
see that minnie has a nice bright sixpence .
“ typical behaviour , ” said the chaplain , as he quitted the carriage .
she doubted that miss lavish was a great artist .
piano .
on george emerson cleaning his father’s boots ;
he called on mr flack , the local builder , a most reasonable and respectful man who agreed that tiles would have made more artistic roof , but pointed out that slates were cheaper .
he will never think anything worth while .
oh , what was the name ?
“ what does he know ?
young people , young people !
before the show breaks up she would like to drop the august title of the eternal woman , and go there as her transitory self .
“ oh , by-the-by , did miss honeychurch enjoy london ?
a dear friend of mine , contessa baroncelli , has two daughters , and when she cannot send a maid to school with them , she lets them go in sailor-hats instead .
women mind such a thing .
for the only relationship which cecil conceived was feudal :
passion is sanity , and the woman you love , she is the only person you will ever really understand .’ ” he sighed :
but i do love you surely in a better way than he does .
i only go into the country to see my friends and to enjoy the scenery .
” she asked , seized with incontrollable anger .
miss bartlett sighed “ i am no match for you in conversation , dearest .
“ hush !
go out of this house , and never come into it again as long as i live here ” flushing as she spoke and pointing to the door .
mr beebe was not able to tell the ladies of his adventure at modena , where the chambermaid burst in upon him in his bath , exclaiming cheerfully , “ fa niente , sono vecchia .
she was talking to mr beebe , and as she spoke , her long narrow head drove backwards and forwards , slowly , regularly , as though she were demolishing some invisible obstacle .
“ no go on .
in her presence he could not act the parson any longer at all events not without apology .
mr beebe edged round it with difficulty .
“ we weren’t talking of real fences , ” said lucy , laughing .
she was again conscious of some new idea , and was not sure whither it would lead her .
through the window she saw cecil himself , turning over the pages of a novel .
“ no ;
he is working at gemistus pletho .
nor was she the passionate young lady , who performs so tragically on a summer’s evening with the window open .
she was sure that she ought not to be with these men ;
“ you never can , dear .
they are taken in a snare that cannot fail .
“ how can you ask such a ridiculous question ?
they found the whole room a mass of blue vases and jugs and the story ends with so ungentlemanly and yet so beautiful .’ it is all very difficult .
and before they had gone a dozen yards he jumped out , and came running back for vyse’s match-box , which had not been returned .
and her unselfishness !
“ broken ?
she did not .
they were probably the only people enjoying the expedition .
this did not alarm her ;
” she said rather crossly .
“ certainly !
“ i do implore absolute secrecy .
there is at times a magic in identity of position ;
can i have a little ink , please ?’ but you know what italians are , and meanwhile the grotto fell roaring on to the beach , and the saddest thing of all is that she cannot remember what she has written .
ahem !
“ i , too , intend to judge him charitably .
“ it’s only for a few days .
that’s why i’ve sent for you .
john ascending , which had been framed .
he finds me too old .
they won’t come back .
” she exclaimed , getting very red ;
“ she doesn’t mind it .
and then , without a word of greeting , she reopened the piano .
“ i beg your pardon ?
“ oh , good !
“ mrs honeychurch , i’m going to do what i am always supposed to do , but generally i’m too shy .
“ let us keep to the future , though , ” interrupted mr beebe .
“ wasn’t what name ?
i shall never forget your insight ;
so it’s you !
“ what nonsense i have talked how abstract and remote !
he did not want to read that letter his temptations never lay in that direction ;
the miss alans did go to greece , but they went by themselves .
“ lascia , prego , lascia .
“ you met her with my daughter in florence .
miss lavish knew , somehow , and had printed the past in draggled prose , for cecil to read and for george to hear .
lucy , too , was perplexed ;
with a certain amount of insight she drew her young cousin affectionately to her .
lucy promised , a little depressed .
“ my father has that effect on nearly everyone , ” he informed her .
for the companion who is merely uncongenial in the mediaeval world becomes exasperating in the classical .
there was really something blameworthy (she thought) in their joint contemplation of the shadowy stream , in the common impulse which had turned them to the house without the passing of a look or word .
so the grittiness went out of life .
sir harry is too disgusting with his decayed gentlewomen .’ i meant to read him a lesson some time .
ah !
there are details it burnt .
it has no grass , no flowers , no frescoes , no glittering walls of marble or comforting patches of ruddy brick .
no one was inside it , except one tourist ;
he did not want to join the c .
their little tiff was over .
she looked around as much as to say , “ are you all like this ?
“ i must say cousin charlotte was very kind to me that year i called on my bike , ” put in freddy .
lucy said that this was most kind , and at once opened the baedeker , to see where santa croce was .
“ if that is so , dear if the drive we and mr beebe are going with mr eager is really the same as the one we are going with mr beebe , then i foresee a sad kettle of fish .
finally they split into groups .
“ if miss honeychurch ever takes to live as she plays , it will be very exciting both for us and for her .
but he has not told .
“ for her also it must have been a terrible experience .
a fault in the scenery , a face in the audience , an irruption of the audience on to the stage , and all our carefully planned gestures mean nothing , or mean too much .
“ so you do love me , little thing ?
miss bartlett was already seated on a tightly stuffed arm-chair , which had the colour and the contours of a tomato .
” “ tell her , no nonsense ” “ anne !
i do sympathize and agree most profoundly .
it is one of the moments for which the world was made .
” said miss bartlett , puzzled at the word .
“ lucy !
hence cecil’s irritation and lucy’s belief that his irritation was just .
he was almost the only person who remained friendly to them .
“ where are the others ?
” cried mr emerson .
” she did develop most wonderfully day by day .
“ i must get away , ever so far .
but cecil , since his engagement , had taken to affect a cosmopolitan naughtiness which he was far from possessing .
the thoughts of a cab-driver , however just , seldom affect the lives of his employers .
“ would your mother spare you again so soon ?
” and then hastened to unlock the house .
he does but touch the surface of things .
excited by her pleasant afternoon , she clapped her hands .
i can’t think why mrs honeychurch allows it .
miss bartlett , indeed , though not in word , had taught the girl that this our life contains nothing satisfactory .
piano !
though she was hopeless about pictures , and though she dressed so unevenly oh , that cerise frock yesterday at church !
“ mr beebe !
sir harry likewise seemed almost too glad to get rid of them .
evening approached while they chatted ;
” then he checked himself .
mr beebe was highly entertained .
lucy , who was in the little seat , seemed on the edge of a green magic carpet which hovered in the air above the tremulous world .
if here and there he was dissatisfied or puzzled , he must acquiesce ;
when cross he was always elaborate , and made long , clever answers where “ yes ” or “ no ” would have done .
“ i was never so much ashamed of myself in my life ;
“ i know his mother ;
“ i meant , ” said cecil stiffly , “ that she is going to marry me .
when love comes , that is reality .’ i said :
they are going into the church , too .
since cecil has come after lucy he hasn’t been so pleasant , at least i can’t explain .
it is the giottos that i want to see , if you will kindly tell me which they are .
then , threatened again with rheumatism , he strolled to the window , opened it (as the english will) , and leant out .
only don’t ” she nearly said , “ don’t protect him .
from time to time he bounced in his chair and puffed and groaned , for the day was hot and the print small , and the human frame fearfully made ;
not thus had she played on the little draped piano at the bertolini , and “ too much schumann ” was not the remark that mr beebe had passed to himself when she returned .
“ lucy !
“ minnie can sleep with you .
“ but , of course , you know all about these things , and you have mr vyse to help you .
john , ” some della robbia babies , and some guido reni madonnas .
there is no need to call him a wicked young man , but obviously he is thoroughly unrefined .
“ naturally i should have told her .
” then he burst out excitedly ;
“ you know , lucy , you and charlotte and mr beebe all tell me i’m so stupid , so i suppose i am , but i shall never understand this hole-and-corner work .
“ is it a thing or a person when freddy sings ?
“ he thought we should be artistic .
a passion of gratitude all feelings grow to passions in the south came over the husband , and he blessed the people and the things who had taken so much trouble about a young fool .
he made her think about sin , and she went under thinking about it .
he is disappointed .
the first fine afternoon your ladies must go to prato .
i suppose it comes out of some book .
“ pictures !
it is fate .
even their church , built upon the slope of the hill so artfully , with its beautiful raised transept and its spire of silvery shingle even their church had lost its charm ;
” said lucy , who kept commendably calm .
i must dress too .
she cried :
“ i must be going , ” said he , shutting his eyes and taking out his watch .
the night received her , as it had received miss bartlett thirty years before .
if at times strange images rose from the depths , she put them down to nerves .
then it is over .
he thought he had a right to try .
they were disgusted at her past hypocrisy ;
“ hear , hear !
” protested miss bartlett , and followed her across the lawn .
it was a real catastrophe , not a mere episode , that evening of hers at venice , when she had found in her bedroom something that is one worse than a flea , though one better than something else .
miss bartlett said , with more restraint :
grant me that , at all events .
oh , for a little air !
and even more curious was the drawing-room , which attempted to rival the solid comfort of a bloomsbury boarding-house .
“ you go down to the others , ” said lucy ;
sir harry , beware of canaries :
satisfactory that mr emerson had not been told of the florence escapade ;
“ he told us another day that views are really crowds crowds of trees and houses and hills and are bound to resemble each other , like human crowds and that the power they have over us is sometimes supernatural , for the same reason .
i do wish i could make you see it my way .
“ i see , i see .
(untrue ;
afterwards but i may have said too much already .
“ i am sorry ;
“ not a bit !
” said cecil , trying to recover himself .
and then freddy came bounding upstairs , and joined the ranks of the ill-behaved .
but in the south-west there had appeared a dull haze of yellow , which might mean better weather if it did not mean worse .
lucy’s sabbath was generally of this amphibious nature .
i do .
the first vacant room in the front ” “ you must have it , ” said miss bartlett , part of whose travelling expenses were paid by lucy’s mother a piece of generosity to which she made many a tactful allusion .
i must be a poetess after all .
she continued .
” he turned back into the room .
” she asked thoughtfully .
they wished that they also knew italian , for our phrases of approval and of amazement are so connected with little occasions that we fear to use them on great ones .
on another day , when the whole world was singing and the air ran into the mouth , like wine , she would refuse to stir from the drawing-room , saying that she was an old thing , and no fit companion for a hearty girl .
“ emerson’s a common enough name , ” lucy remarked .
she could not think what she would have done .
” he asked , with scarcely veiled insolence .
charlotte declined for herself ;
charlotte , charlotte , how could you have told her ?
she was choosing the better part .
“ she was a novelist , ” said lucy craftily .
francis .
she thinks i am silly about it .
we have no rights over his soul .
it was sad to see her thus blind to the beauties of an august wood .
you had your own way about these rooms , at all events .
i have cared for you since that man died .
“ va bene , ” he replied , and accepted it .
he had said that people ought to overhaul themselves , and she did not want to overhaul herself ;
they would descend he knew their ways past the shrubbery , and past the tennis-lawn and the dahlia-bed , until they reached the kitchen garden , and there , in the presence of the potatoes and the peas , the great event would be discussed .
“ he has misbehaved himself from the first .
” and as in her case thoughts never remained unspoken long , she burst out with :
“ for a crowd is more than the people who make it up .
if a girl breaks off her engagement , everyone says :
“ what sort of things ?
“ but you must not scold him .
“ he only tried when he should not have tried .
one man was stabbed , and another held her in his arms .
the colours on the trees and hills were purified , and the arno lost its muddy solidity and began to twinkle .
i do not like the emersons .
“ not a word , mr eager not a single word .
“ i really think we had better go to bed , if you don’t mind .
she was nervous at night .
“ but perhaps you would rather not ?
it’s the only hope at times .
.
if charlotte had only known , she would have stopped me going in , and i should have gone to silly greece , and become different for ever .
fearing that she had offended cecil , she turned quickly round .
he cursed his love of metaphor ;
“ then sit you down , ” said miss lavish .
“ oh , cecil , i do , i do !
an idea rushed across lucy’s brain , which , had she thought of it sooner and made it part of her , might have proved victorious .
her manner altered .
as soon as he had turned his back , lucy arose with the running of a maniac and stole down the arcade towards the arno .
“ do you go to much of this sort of thing ?
she had been there in the rain the previous afternoon .
what’s the name of this aromatic plant ?
i suppose i must forgive you .
“ is he a journalist now ?
“ certainly you can .
don’t say , i didn’t do this ,’ for you did it , ten to one .
“ i could see that miss bartlett thought it unwise .
tall and refined , with shoulders that seemed braced square by an effort of the will , and a head that was tilted a little higher than the usual level of vision , he resembled those fastidious saints who guard the portals of a french cathedral .
“ e un diavolo incarnato !
“ no ” she gasped , and , for the second time , was kissed by him .
“ of course i don’t think that .
” unlatching the gate , he sauntered over the triangular green to cissie villa .
“ i expect she will .
in this atmosphere the pension bertolini and windy corner appeared equally crude , and lucy saw that her london career would estrange her a little from all that she had loved in the past .
“ oh , dear me , no oh , no !
marriage is a duty .
other people had .
“ mr beebe , you are wrong .
of course , i was holding back on my cousin’s account .
she could never marry .
lucy became rather hysterical with the delay .
“ mistrust all enterprises that require new clothes .
the garden of windy corners was deserted except for a red book , which lay sunning itself upon the gravel path .
the carriage stopped at the rectory .
that is to say , she was now better able to stifle the emotions of which the conventions and the world disapprove .
what a pleasant surprise !
once she had suffered from “ things that came out of nothing and meant she didn’t know what .
the boy may lose his way .
“ they that marry do well , but they that refrain do better .
i am too uninteresting and old-fashioned only fit to pack and unpack your things .
summer street , too , makes it so specially funny .
her mother was rather inquisitive , and might have asked what it was about .
“ but aren’t they always waylaying you to go out with them , dear ?
“ no , of course not really , ” she answered .
he was apparently content .
not a fool , i fancy , but very immature pessimism , et cetera .
george she had faced , and could have faced again , but she had forgotten how to treat his father .
” then he added :
she stood with clasped hands while the girl worked herself into the necessary rage .
they were an odd couple to go driving ;
“ i know , dear .
“ i wonder .
of course , you must look over the arno , too .
“ you shall see for yourself how your protégés are .
in the national gallery , when i was up to see my mother last week .
was that it ?
she shook her head .
lucy would enjoy this letter , and the smile with which mr beebe greeted windy corner was partly for her .
you can settle your debt nicely now .
george’s eyes laughed , and lucy suspected that he and her mother would get on rather well .
the dreadful catastrophe of the previous day had given her an idea which she thought would work up into a book .
come .
she had worked like a great artist ;
you aren’t like yourself .
“ mr emerson , he will call , i shall call ;
no one but his mother can remember the faults of freddy .
“ what do you think about it ?
could literature influence life ?
the sky had grown wilder since he stood there last hour , giving to the land a tragic greatness that is rare in surrey .
mr beebe watched the shadow springing and shouting over the tennis-court .
the deceit of the most promising people .
cecil should have the parsifal , and anything else that he liked .
could any one give her change ?
“ i hope that you will enjoy greece with mr vyse .
“ i am sorry i was so cross about greece , but it came on the top of the dahlias .
miss alan asked her to play .
“ how do you propose to silence him ?
motives are all very well , but the fence comes here .
cecil frowned again .
” then she went to the carriage and murmured , “ the old man hasn’t been told ;
lucy was silent .
as he took it , he said :
really she must overhaul herself and settle everything up before she married him .
in his normal state mr beebe would never have repeated such gossip , but he was trying to shelter lucy in her little trouble .
how could a florentine cab-driver ever get hold of cecil ?
“ introduce me .
i have never known you till this evening .
mr beebe laughs just like an ordinary man .
they began to play .
apparently she had given the wrong answer .
but an italian can never be ignored , least of all when he has a grievance .
don’t be angry !
“ friends of cecil’s , ” he repeated , “ and so really dee-sire-rebel .
mr beebe had turned the conversation so cleverly , and she hoped that the young man was not very much hurt at her asking him .
sunset the sunset of italy .
do you remember in that church , when you pretended to be annoyed with me and weren’t ?
“ i think i shall go out , ” said lucy .
she was delighted .
she doubted that mr eager was as full of spirituality and culture as she had been led to suppose .
“ poor girl !
once by the river oh , but he isn’t killed he wouldn’t be killed , would he ?
“ you see , we don’t like to take ” began lucy .
accordingly they drifted through a series of those grey-brown streets , neither commodious nor picturesque , in which the eastern quarter of the city abounds .
“ i want them to start from venice , and go in a cargo steamer down the illyrian coast !
she said so .
it is the least you can do , surely , considering it all happened because you broke your word .
” she sighed .
mrs honeychurch went back to the window .
mary !
“ poor young man !
the kindness that mr beebe and lucy had always known to exist in him came out suddenly , like sunlight touching a vast landscape a touch of the morning sun ?
rain and darkness came on together .
“ from the red gold keep thy finger ;
freddy lit his bicycle lamp for him in the porch , and with his usual felicity of phrase , said :
“ i shall never forgive myself , ” said miss bartlett , who kept on rising from her seat , and had to be begged by the united company to remain .
“ otherwise ?
who could conjecture with admirable delicacy “ where things might lead to , ” but apparently lost sight of the goal as she approached it .
lucy , who had not yet acquired decency , at once rose to her feet , exclaiming :
the old man was refreshed by sleep , and took up the matter warmly .
“ tact !
it would seem that the whole earth lay before them , not as a map , but as a chess-board , whereon they continually behold the changing pieces as well as the squares .
“ but who am i to give the sovereign to ?
this isn’t a cold .
i wish it was bigger , ” he added apologetically .
you talked of our wedding at lunch at least , you let me talk .
do not go out of george’s life saying he is abominable .
and as for the frescoes , i see no truth in them .
to us shall all flesh turn in the end .
he says that the miss alans must go to the wall .
for they were to pick up miss bartlett at summer street , where she had been dropped as the carriage went down , to pay a call on mr beebe’s old mother .
at times our need for a sympathetic gesture is so great that we care not what exactly it signifies or how much we may have to pay for it afterwards .
very glad to see you , and that you are taking george for a bathe .
“ she and cecil are thicker than ever .
“ violets ?
he only felt that miss bartlett knew of some vague influence from which the girl desired to be delivered , and which might well be clothed in the fleshly form .
“ there you go .
i only meant how jolly kind she seemed .
that all life is perhaps a knot , a tangle , a blemish in the eternal smoothness .
the house was again as it ought to be cut off forever from cecil’s pretentious world .
she looked at the books again black , brown , and that acrid theological blue .
but if she rushed into the fray herself she would be first censured , then despised , and finally ignored .
“ all right , if you’d really rather .
so impertinent and yet the house “ did , ” for it was the home of people who loved their surroundings honestly .
this struck cecil as subtle , and pleased him .
at least , that is to say , i will hear no breath of censure against our dear queen .’ it was horrible speaking .
it should be a most pathetic novel .
you have each other and all these woods to walk in , so full of beautiful things ;
it is very remiss of me .
powell can go round to the stables .
she exclaimed , “ the sacred lake !
this lucy was glad enough to do .
“ and mess with typewriters and latch-keys , ” exploded mrs honeychurch .
with some solemnity the door was shut , and a cane chair placed for the girl .
life is easy to chronicle , but bewildering to practice , and we welcome “ nerves ” or any other shibboleth that will cloak our personal desire .
the wind roared , the trees groaned , yet the noise seemed insufficient for those vast operations in heaven .
people congratulated mrs honeychurch , which is , i believe , a social blunder , but it pleased her , and she introduced cecil rather indiscriminately to some stuffy dowagers .
give me the pound , and we shall avoid this deplorable gambling .
certainly they had seemed a long time in reaching santa croce , the tower of which had been plainly visible from the landing window .
“ all the way to greece ?
however , for the fourth time windy corner lay poised below him now as a beacon in the roaring tides of darkness .
with such an education as that , i thought he was bound to grow up happy .
she must forget that george loved her , that george had been thinking through her and gained her this honourable release , that george had gone away into what was it ?
“ you sit still ;
he never had been anything ;
they have no conception of the intellectual life .
it is sweet to protect her in the intervals of business , sweet to pay her honour when she has cooked our dinner well .
she is not frozen , lucy , she is not withered up all through .
but give me a moment’s time .
what more is one to give him ?
“ has he indeed ?
i want you to believe that .
but he does not mean to be uncivil he once explained it is the things that upset him he is easily upset by ugly things he is not uncivil to people .
a shrill cry rose from the vendor .
we lose the sense of proportion ;
“ am i really to go ?
they are known to cecil , who is very well and spoke of you the other day .
of course , it must be a wonderful building .
i wanted to live and have my chance of joy .
she just said :
eleanor was a reticent woman at heart .
” she developed this position .
five shillings , and i gave a bob to the driver .
she sent for miss bartlett .
may i tell them to write to you ?
her runs were not at all like strings of pearls , and she struck no more right notes than was suitable for one of her age and situation .
“ about that dreadful afternoon in february .
when he first came here he not unnaturally put people’s backs up .
“ there is a certain amount of kindness , just as there is a certain amount of light , ” he continued in measured tones .
i knew nothing about it at all .
the queerest people !
at her throat is a garnet brooch , on her finger a ring set with rubies an engagement ring .
it is lamentable , lamentable incredible .
the song died away ;
i hope it isn’t because george spoke that you are both going ?
which is it to be ?
“ mean what ?
how had she stood cecil for a moment ?
“ oh , good gracious me !
“ among other things , that an awful friend of hers had been bicycling through summer street , wondered if she’d come up and see us , and mercifully didn’t .
” asked the other , michelangelesque on the flooded margin .
it’s a sad thing , but i’d far rather let to some one who is going up in the world than to someone who has come down .
“ men don’t gossip over tea-cups .
” they sparred at each other , and one of them was hit lightly upon the chest .
and lucy saw an alteration in him since last sunday .
“ i don’t know , miss honeychurch , if you have noticed that miss pole , the lady who has so much yellow hair , takes lemonade .
and call it a mission when no one wants you !
they were sitting on some steps in the uffizi arcade .
as he had put it to himself at florence , “ she might yet reveal depths of strangeness , if not of meaning .
i don’t apologize .
the clever lady then said that she was going to spend a long morning in santa croce , and if lucy would come too , she would be delighted .
as a student of art ?
she slipped her arm into her cousin’s , and they started off along the lung’ arno .
“ don’t be troubled , dearest .
he did not realize that , taken together , they kindled the room into the life that he desired .
steady on !
the young man gazed down on the three ladies , who felt seated on the floor , so low were their chairs .
“ no .
every moment of his life he’s forming you , telling you what’s charming or amusing or ladylike , telling you what a man thinks womanly ;
she proceeded no further into things , for mr beebe reappeared , looking extremely pleasant .
we cannot tell whether our secret is important or not .
good-night again .
he ought never to have asked me .
she played a few bars of the flower maidens’ song very badly and then she stopped .
at this point mr emerson , whom the shock of stopping had awoke , declared that the lovers must on no account be separated , and patted them on the back to signify his approval .
something in thackeray .
why is she so long ?
close by , beyond the curtains , the gentle murmur of a long conversation had never ceased .
he probably did ;
you had much better not play .
they are not nice .
she understood very well , but she no longer wished to be absolutely truthful .
very glad to hear that your sister is going to marry .
“ only medical books .
but she saw that they were in for what is known as “ quite a scene , ” and she had an odd feeling that whenever these ill-bred tourists spoke the contest widened and deepened till it dealt , not with rooms and views , but with well , with something quite different , whose existence she had not realized before .
that’s windy corner .
“ i meant it’s better not .
his head fell on his chest .
she led the way up the garden , cecil following her , george last .
she sat on one ;
“ gentlemen sometimes do not realize ” her voice faded away , but miss bartlett seemed to understand and a conversation developed , in which gentlemen who did not thoroughly realize played a principal part .
“ a drawing-room , pray ?
the miss alans were found in their beloved temperance hotel near bloomsbury a clean , airless establishment much patronized by provincial england .
her heart warmed towards him for the first time .
poor charlotte how i do detest blouses !
“ but , mr emerson mr emerson what are you talking about ?
“ please please i know i am a sad spoil-sport , but it would make me wretched .
“ look at the lights going over the bridge .
miss bartlett was silent .
she stood in the square of the annunziata and saw in the living terra-cotta those divine babies whom no cheap reproduction can ever stale .
though i like things like the della robbia babies better .
he is so sorry !
he was probably trying to become acquainted with them before they got into the swim .
old mr emerson was sitting by the fire , with his foot upon a gout-stool .
i’ve got it .
we nearly complained about him to our depressing signora , but i am glad to say we thought better of it .
a carriage drew up at the front-door .
he said :
he was not a coward and bore necessary pain as well as any man .
here , not only in the solitude of nature , might a hero meet a goddess , or a heroine a god .
“ i have been thinking , lucy , of that letter of charlotte’s .
lucy did not look at the view either .
” she was still silent .
“ i don’t understand you .
the arno was rising in flood , washing away the traces of the little carts upon the foreshore .
“ prato !
he could detect no parishioners except the pine-trees , rising up steeply on all sides , and gesturing to each other against the blue .
mrs honeychurch had been civil , but obtuse in essentials , while as for freddy “ he is only a boy , ” he reflected .
” he pointed down-stream .
why could she not be freddy , who stood stiff in the middle of the room ;
lucy felt contemptuous , for she was on the tack of caring for greek sculpture , and had already borrowed a mythical dictionary from mr beebe to get up the names of the goddesses and gods .
.
“ let’s hope that mrs harris there warn’t no sich person , ” said her mother .
what was the italian for “ clergyman ” ?
you have all you want , miss honeychurch :
i know that , with george , you will find them , and that you love him .
but he lacked chivalry ;
make him realize that by the side of the everlasting why there is a yes a transitory yes if you like , but a yes .
“ it gets too dark , ” she said hopelessly .
“ your behaviour ?
he alone had interpreted the message that lucy had received five days before from the lips of a dying man .
” said lucy , who had inherited from her mother a distaste to dirt .
“ yes , i will help her , ” said the clergyman , setting his jaw firm .
take your independence and be gone .
he will live ;
do you suppose that a man like cecil would take the slightest notice of anything you say ?
“ tut , tut !
“ oh , you droll person !
there they stood , with their shining limbs bursting from the garments of charity , and their strong white arms extended against circlets of heaven .
“ he is not ;
“ you are a clever woman , ” said mr emerson .
you are so young and inexperienced , you have lived among such nice people , that you cannot realize what men can be how they can take a brutal pleasure in insulting a woman whom her sex does not protect and rally round .
george , who disliked any darkness , said :
she would rather be with those inquisitive old maids than with freddy and me .
it was at him that she gazed before replying .
“ don’t open the window ;
they alone will visit athens and delphi , and either shrine of intellectual song that upon the acropolis , encircled by blue seas ;
“ you don’t mean , ” he said , absolutely ignoring miss bartlett “ you don’t mean that you are going to marry that man ?
i hate the word now , because of all the cant with which superstition has wrapped it round .
“ of course , ” said the little old lady ;
” she paused , as if rehearsing her eulogy , but her face remained dissatisfied .
” said mr beebe .
“ buon giorno !
“ i bought some photographs at alinari’s .
she remembered that in all his perversities he had never spoken against affection .
i love it ;
“ you can’t expect a really musical person to enjoy comic songs as we do .
“ inglese italianato ?
they went into the hall .
he said :
“ she doesn’t like it .
she could only assure herself that cecil had known freddy some time , and that they had always got on pleasantly , except , perhaps , during the last few days , which was an accident , perhaps .
“ no it is just possible .
” but she knew in her heart that she could not trust him , for he desired her untouched .
you ought to try the alps or the lakes .
she goes in for lectures and improving her mind , and all the time a thick layer of flue under the beds , and the maid’s dirty thumb-marks where you turn on the electric light .
but he came forward pleasantly enough and accepted the chair into which he was beckoned by lucy .
the palace tower had lost the reflection of the declining day , and joined itself to earth .
it was not till a late hour that miss bartlett had recovered her luggage and could say in her usual tone of gentle reproach :
when we were only acquaintances , you let me be myself , but now you’re always protecting me .
it was quite easy to say , “ because george emerson has been bothering me , and if he hears i’ve given up cecil may begin again ” quite easy , and it had the incidental advantage of being true .
all those old women smirking !
” said mr emerson .
miss lucy , you are to go .
it slipped between love and hatred and jealousy , and all the furniture of the pictorial style .
the world of motor-cars and rural deans receded inimitably .
windy corner glimmered .
.quickness to perceive good in others .
all the fighting that mattered had been done by others by italy , by his father , by his wife .
“ hard in life , hard in death .
mother , would it be ?
stop being so tiresome , and tell me instead what part of the church you want to see .
they were talking about the emersons .
conversation was tedious ;
none of her friends had seen her , either in the piazza or , later on , by the embankment .
go .
“ i wish the miss alans could see this , ” observed mr beebe , just as lucy , who was nursing the injured minnie , was in turn lifted off her feet by her brother .
“ poor charlotte will be sopped , ” was lucy’s reply .
she got into the victoria and placed herself with her back to the horse .
there they still are !
but that some sonatas of beethoven are written tragic no one can gainsay ;
“ at last , ” thought she , “ i shall understand myself .
who told you about the violets ?
he seemed thoughtful , and after a few moments added :
and you , you of all women , listen to his voice instead of to your own .
in her heart also there are springing up strange desires .
she became almost garrulous over the incident that had made her faint five minutes before .
“ unpardonable question !
good-bye .
“ oh , dear !
“ the narrowness and superficiality of the anglo-saxon tourist is nothing less than a menace .
on the landing he paused strong in his renunciation , and gave her a look of memorable beauty .
her breast heaved quickly .
“ surely you agree ?
as she changed her frock , she wondered whether cecil was sneering at her ;
“ good-night , cecil .
“ all right .
protestant as she was , lucy darted forward .
he asked the girl whether she knew florence well , and was informed at some length that she had never been there before .
can any one give me change for half a crown ?
“ yes , ” said lucy despondently .
“ i cannot think you were right , ” said cecil gently .
“ indeed , i’m not !
three split infinitives .
i will try .
but that is the kind of thing .
call on your grandmother !
i remember how i used to get on his nerves at rome .
“ not a bit !
“ he is nice , ” exclaimed lucy .
i know it so well .
“ lucy , dear ” said miss bartlett , gently reproving her cousin’s penetration .
tut !
no longer either a rebel or a slave .
somewhere in their folds were concealed miss lavish and miss bartlett , who had chosen this afternoon to visit the torre del gallo .
a drive in the hills with mr eager and miss bartlett even if culminating in a residential tea-party was no longer the greatest of them .
he paused for a phrase .
he was a snob , and so conceited , and he did say such unkind things .
he took a malicious pleasure in thwarting people .
“ oh , indeed , ” said mr eager .
he has no tact and no manners i don’t mean by that that he has bad manners and he will not keep his opinions to himself .
“ oh , for a real man !
“ all the way ?
for it was on cecil that the little episode turned , though his name was never mentioned .
you always think women don’t mean what they say .
“ let’s leave it all till mother comes back , ” suggested lucy .
“ we mothers ” simpered mrs honeychurch , and then realized that she was affected , sentimental , bombastic all the things she hated most .
“ that is exactly like you .
” she had bowed but to whom ?
and no more does cecil .
he ought not to have tried .
freddy gabbled the grace , and they drew up their heavy chairs and fell to .
“ i know the faults of mary .
since i came to summer street she has been away .
the great square was in shadow ;
the chaperon had done her work .
it was evening and again the spring .
and he did win .
“ i believe it was my photographs that you threw away .
all that he said on this subject pained her , though he exuded tolerance from every pore ;
i hope you didn’t go behaving like that to poor freddy .
“ don’t you see that i have to go away ?
i have met so few liberal landowners , and i was anxious to compare his attitude towards the game laws with the conservative attitude .
but i happen to know that it belongs to the young man , and i was sure your mother would not like it .
but the external situation she will face that bravely .
so miss lavish proceeded through the streets of the city of florence , short , fidgety , and playful as a kitten , though without a kitten’s grace .
no more do i .
his arm swept the horizon gracefully ;
“ and i have been thinking , ” she added rather nervously , “ surely we could squeeze charlotte in here next week , and give her a nice holiday while the plumbers at tunbridge wells finish .
that simply means the workmen weren’t paid properly .
“ i think he would not take advantage of your acceptance , nor expect you to show gratitude .
miss lavish he believed he understood , but miss bartlett might reveal unknown depths of strangeness , though not perhaps , of meaning .
“ i wish i had never bothered over it at all .
but really i am so worried , and lady otway will only say that i cannot be too careful , which is quite true , but no real help .
“ of course i’m not !
“ oh , i do wish freddy and your mother could be here .
” called lucy , stopping short .
” once more she closed the unfortunate piano .
do you suppose that i shall get it ?
it was a family saying that “ you never knew which way charlotte bartlett would turn .
miss bartlett suggested the former .
charlotte’s energy !
a baby is worth a dozen saints .
“ i never do play tennis , ” said cecil , painfully bewildered ;
we all exaggerate , and we get very angry with people who don’t .
“ freddy , you must come .
the melody rose , unprofitably magical .
tea at the beehive apparently involved a complete change of apparel .
“ bother the drive !
” he asked .
no doubt i am neither artistic nor literary nor intellectual nor musical , but i cannot help the drawing-room furniture ;
jump in .
and soon his garments made a third little pile on the sward , and he too asserted the wonder of the water .
of course , it contained frescoes by giotto , in the presence of whose tactile values she was capable of feeling what was proper .
the faults of mary i forget the faults of mary , but they are very grave .
again the thought occurred to her , “ oh , what have i done ?
“ because of the fifteen shillings and the five , ” they said solemnly .
in fact , he is certain to know .
a radical out and out , she learnt to speak with horror of suburbia .
“ that woman understands everything , ” was mr emerson’s reply .
” breathed the little old lady , and shuddered as if all the winds of heaven had entered the apartment .
but they were conscious of a love more mysterious than this .
she and her secret stayed ten days longer in the deserted metropolis visiting the scenes they were to know so well later on .
lucy fell , the beautiful white devil rolled from her hand .
what’s to be done ?
“ no , i hate seeings-off , ” said lucy .
at times i could wring her neck .
whereas lucy would be his parishioner .
“ i’m afraid i don’t .
to go to constantinople until they are used to the idea and everything has calmed down .
“ lucy , be quick there’s no time for us to talk now come to me as you came in the spring , and afterwards i will be gentle and explain .
and if i were superstitious i’d be frightened of the girl , too .
“ peeping like that !
no , i don’t see and i never shall see why miss what’s-her-name shouldn’t pay that bob for the driver .
“ no , he didn’t .
“ i agree with you , mr vyse .
lucy soothed him and tinkered at the conversation in a way that promised well for their married peace .
he has bargained to drive us , and he is doing it .
“ it isn’t worth reading it’s too silly to read i never saw such rubbish it oughtn’t to be allowed to be printed .
the sort who has made england what she is .
this afternoon , for example , if i had not arrived , what would have happened ?
“ oh , lucia come back here oh , what an awful man !
” freddy asked him .
“ and presumably he has brought up his son to be a socialist , too ?
“ uno piu piccolo , ” was her next remark , implying “ has the cigar been given to you by mr beebe , the smaller of the two good men ?
“ the two ladies , at all events , have made it up .
she had bowed across the rubbish that cumbers the world .
she shrugged her shoulders , as if his vulgarity wearied her .
you jump over them just as you jump into a peasant’s olive-yard in the apennines , and he is glad to see you .
smiling indulgently , he lit a cigarette , and rehearsed the events that had led to such a happy conclusion .
mrs honeychurch might have flamed out .
as she entered he stopped , and said :
“ the fault of euphemia is that she will not , simply will not , chop the suet sufficiently small .
look at that fat man in blue !
mrs honeychurch defended orthodoxy , and in the midst of the confusion miss bartlett , dressed in the very height of the fashion , came strolling down the stairs .
she is marrying someone else’ ;
“ good-bye !
lucy fidgeted ;
“ i didn’t mean to be unkind .
charlotte and i are not the very least alike .
she was glad , but he had expected greater gladness .
but we could not be under an obligation .
he looked at her as she stood by the pool’s edge .
“ she is emancipated , but only in the very best sense of the word , ” continued miss bartlett slowly .
“ come here , old lady thank you for putting away my bonnet kiss me .
no woman of leonardo’s could have anything so vulgar as a “ story .
it was a treat for the girl to be with any one so clever and so cheerful ;
“ no , thank you .
it was miss bartlett’s turn to wince .
“ i can’t think , ” said lucy gravely .
left to herself , lucy would have told her mother and her lover ingenuously , and it would have remained a little thing .
the rooms the signora promised us in her letter would have looked over the arno .
i heard from them this morning .
but each time that she avoided george it became more imperative that she should avoid him again .
“ very well , george doesn’t mind tennis on sunday .
“ when i wouldn’t have george baptized , ” said he .
“ i don’t think i will , thank you .
” asked george .
oh , yes , all right all right .
but either because the rains had given a freshness or because the sun was shedding a most glorious heat , or because two of the gentlemen were young in years and the third young in spirit for some reason or other a change came over them , and they forgot italy and botany and fate .
“ doubtless you know her monographs in the series of mediæval byways’ ?
that’s all .
domestic arrangements always attracted her , especially when they were on a small scale .
“ why did you tell her , though ?
one was tired of everything , it seemed .
“ we don’t want no dessert .
yet it does seem so unkind .
he says the thought of seeing you and of hearing about you i am not justifying him :
these did not attract her .
you put us all to shame .
only let to a man .
“ leonora ?
“ a lady to wait , sir .
you are even greater than i thought .
“ are these people great readers ?
mr eager addressed her professionally :
“ oh for goodness’ sake , do come .
the lecturer was a clergyman , and his audience must be also his flock , for they held prayer-books as well as guide-books in their hands .
cecil , mind you marry her next january .
“ oh , it’s all right .
you were all right as long as you kept to things , but when you came to people ” she stopped .
she tried to locate it , but as usual she blundered .
a detail of no importance , i suppose ?
we are flung together by fate , drawn apart by fate flung together , drawn apart .
” then she listened to the horse’s hoofs “ he has not told he has not told .
“ she is playing the piano , ” mr beebe said .
he spoke of florence .
“ i have , ” said cecil , and it did not escape mr beebe’s notice that he spoke to the boy more kindly .
he would stroll round the precincts of the court and call out :
a blotting book of vellum ;
he recast the scene .
mr vyse , you ought to have stopped me .
“ there is mother and me generally , and my brother , though it’s not often we get him to ch the church is rather far off , i mean .
from the house came incoherent sounds , as of females preparing for worship .
marry george , miss honeychurch .
the rest of us must be contented with a fair , but a less arduous , goal .
all these colds come of not drying thoroughly .
“ i trust they are the right sort of person .
“ i oughtn’t to come with my troubles to young people .
vacant heart and hand and eye easy live and quiet die .
how glorious it was !
lucy caught her cousin’s eye .
leaning her elbows on the parapet , she contemplated the river arno , whose roar was suggesting some unexpected melody to her ears .
“ i have upset everything .
mr beebe came to the rescue .
how should she talk to mr emerson when he returned from the shadowy square ?
“ she will be delighted .
” whispered lucy as soon as they were alone .
“ i cannot think what people are doing , ” she would say , “ but it is extremely fortunate for the children .
and in a moment she was away over the piazza , her military cloak flapping in the wind ;
she said :
so please , mother , don’t worry us this last summer ;
he took his tone from her .
unluckily i have letters .
the other carriage was left behind .
if they’re vulgar , they somehow keep it to themselves .
do you know what emersons they are ?
chapter vi the reverend arthur beebe , the reverend cuthbert eager , mr emerson , mr george emerson , miss eleanor lavish , miss charlotte bartlett , and miss lucy honeychurch drive out in carriages to see a view ;
the ceiling of the sistine chapel for me .
“ the old man’s .
” said miss bartlett , with a meaning glance , as though conveying that more than dahlias had been broken off by the autumn gales .
next , i meet you together , and find him protecting and teaching you and your mother to be shocked , when it was for you to settle whether you were shocked or no .
love , murder , abduction , revenge , was the plot .
“ it isn’t fair , cecil .
how funny !
there was always a lot against our engagement , cecil , but all our relations seemed pleased , and we met so often , and it was no good mentioning it until well , until all things came to a point .
lucy was recalled to her manners , and after a little exertion the complacency of mr eager was restored .
ah , how beautiful the weald looked !
” again he hesitated , and then said gently :
she was still dressed .
the curtains at the end of the room parted , and revealed a clergyman , stout but attractive , who hurried forward to take his place at the table , cheerfully apologizing for his lateness .
it is the view that alessio baldovinetti is fond of introducing into his pictures .
and she spoke so seriously that the risk became a certainty , and he , lifting his eyes , said :
she thought a disaster was averted .
the boys have got separated from the girls .
“ i for one will help her to go to greece .
the door opened obediently , and two men emerged , whom mr beebe recognized as cecil and freddy .
all right , lucy ” she was sitting up again “ i see you looking down your nose and thinking your mother’s a snob .
of course miss bartlett accepted .
there was no concealing the fact , cecil had meant to be supercilious , and he had succeeded .
“ i shall hate those miss alans !
“ will you speak to him ?
she took no notice of mr emerson looking for his son , nor of miss bartlett looking for miss lavish , nor of miss lavish looking for her cigarette-case .
thus entrenched , she emitted a formal bow .
a poet none was present might have quoted , “ life like a dome of many coloured glass , ” or might have compared the curtains to sluice-gates , lowered against the intolerable tides of heaven .
“ we shall get the silly affair on our nerves if we aren’t careful .
” she thought , and she examined it carefully by the light of a candle .
“ i don’t understand .
george corrected him :
(what is it , minnie dear jam ?) why not tunbridge wells ?
lucy would stop with her cousin .
i am here as a tourist .
“ george !
nasty !
“ are you indeed ?
“ how you do do everything , ” said lucy .
there george was .
mrs honeychurch , too , was silent .
“ i don’t follow you , mr emerson .
“ he has not told , he has not told .
she knew that she wanted something , and independence is a useful cry ;
i am deeply sorry about it .
she never brings anything but blouses .
at this point the clever lady broke in .
did we talk too loud ?
in fact , uncle arthur , the house is not at all what it was yesterday .
give me a man of course , provided he’s clean .
oh , poor miss honeychurch !
“ or perhaps old mr emerson knows .
its brightness mesmerized her , still dancing before her eyes when she bent them to the ground and started towards home .
“ how stupidly you talk !
the impulse had come before to-day , but never so strongly .
he doesn’t admire me , or any of that nonsense , one straw .
miss lavish calculated that , even if they had continued , they would not have been caught in the accident .
the audience clapped , no less respectful .
he did not want to hear about hydrangeas , why they change their colour at the seaside .
you are not that kind , lucy .
george bowed his head , dusty and sombre , exhaling the peculiar smell of one who has handled furniture .
i see people coming you fellows !
“ good .
.
“ my boy shall go back to the earth untouched .
with his momentary cult of the fresh air , he was delighted at her admirable simplicity .
lunch was a cheerful meal .
“ where’s charlotte ?
lucy would never have carried the greek scheme alone .
she closed the instrument .
how she kept to schumann when , like an idiot , i wanted beethoven .
he said oh , he’s like me better detached .’ i couldn’t make him say any more , but it set me thinking .
i only denied ” and he swept off on the subject of fences again , and was brilliant .
he opened the door , and heard the words of a song :
“ no , but have you ever ?
lucy answered suitably .
“ i see you’re going to be clever .
under the chaplain’s guidance they selected many hideous presents and mementoes florid little picture-frames that seemed fashioned in gilded pastry ;
one would always pray against that .
.
“ how do you do ?
“ but , cecil ” proceeded hilariously .
“ i am so sorry that you were stranded .
but this book lies motionless , to be caressed all the morning by the sun and to raise its covers slightly , as though acknowledging the caress .
” and after his long preamble , the three words burst against lucy like waves from the open sea .
i’ll set mrs honeychurch after you .
phaethon , who for some time had been endeavouring to kiss persephone , had just succeeded .
as if i have anything to forgive !
“ will this do ?
” the last remark was made to a vender of panoramic photographs who was approaching with a courteous smile .
george meredith’s right the cause of comedy and the cause of truth are really the same ;
“ you’ll blow my head off !
“ i only let out i didn’t like him .
i’ll buy a guide-book .
why , guess rome was the place where we saw the yaller dog .’ there’s travelling for you .
he was in my london parish long ago .
where did you first meet miss honeychurch and myself ?
or , at the most , in a garden , or on a road .
it had not occurred to her that she would have to do anything .
in an open manner he had shown that he wished to continue their intimacy .
you will wish that it was .
i have just used you as a peg for my silly notions of what a woman should be .
i do so always hope that people will be nice .
who taught us that drawing-room twaddle ?
he half fancied that the soaring accompaniment which he did not lose in the shout of the gale really agreed with freddy , and was gently criticizing the words that it adorned :
“ you’re not worthy of their trust .
“ oh , how glad i am !
there the contrast is just as much as i can realize .
up on the heights , battalions of black pines witnessed the change , themselves unchangeable .
inside , though the saints and gods are not ours , we become true believers , in case any true believer should be present .
“ here we are with the difficulty solved already .
at another time he might have been shocked , for he had depths of prudishness within him .
behind cecil’s back .
it makes an enormous difference , and he lost his head :
it was she who told me that you lived here .
“ eat your dinner , dear .
why do you dawdle talking ?
what have they got ?
it lay between the real and the pretended , and lucy’s first aim was to defeat herself .
he offered to toss freddy for miss bartlett’s quid .
sunset .
freddy rather likes him , and has asked him up here on sunday , so you can judge for yourself .
lucy tripped ahead , simulating hilarity .
mine and his .
more seemed necessary .
it used to be one of miss catharine’s great stories .
“ yes , for we fight for more than love or pleasure ;
mr beebe , whom the conversation amused , stirred her up by saying :
“ george last sunday no , not ill :
and that the somebody elses were farther down the hill .
there was a line of carriages down the road , and the honeychurch vehicle happened to be opposite cissie villa .
“ you are leaving him ?
she did not want to stroke it , but she saw herself wanting to stroke it ;
his mother , too , would be pleased ;
not the scissors , thank you , charlotte , when both my hands are full already i’m perfectly certain that the orange cactus will go before i can get to it .
he is a most interesting man to talk to .
still gibbering with agitation , he walked away .
the view thence of florence is most beautiful far better than the hackneyed view of fiesole .
ha !
the curtains parted .
hullo !
“ there was a great scene over some violets .
then he glanced at lucy , in whose face petty anxieties had marred the smiles .
miss bartlett said that her duty lay in the dahlia bed , but when she had exasperated everyone , except minnie , by a refusal , she turned round and exasperated minnie by an acceptance .
if high ideals make a young man rude , the sooner he gets rid of them the better , ” said mrs honeychurch , handing her the bonnet .
“ emerson , not harris ” ;
“ but they really are coming now , ” said mr beebe .
it had poured all day and as they ascended through the deep surrey lanes showers of water fell from the over-hanging beech-trees and rattled on the hood .
“ my only consolation was that you found people more to your taste , and were often able to leave me at home .
they tried to stifle her with cake .
it is so sad when people who have abilities misuse them , and i must say they nearly always do .
” said the clergyman .
he read :
there is no other way out of it .
good-bye .
in this circle , one thought , married , and died .
i shall do all that i can .
even their seats at dinner had been moved .
it simply can’t be done .
therefore not therefore i kissed you ,’ because the book made me do that , and i wish to goodness i had more self-control .
it is again the darkness creeping in ;
“ eleanor !
to his astonishment , she replied :
“ i expect your father has been reading dante , ” said cecil , fingering the novel , which alone permitted him to lead the conversation .
there’s no point in our stopping .
but ” she pointed at the driver “ he knows everything .
she could discern the river , the golden plain , other hills .
but , in italy , where any one who chooses may warm himself in equality , as in the sun , this conception of life vanished .
“ at eight .
“ thank you so much .
she tore .
old mr emerson claimed her with much warmth , and said how glad he was that she was going to be married .
it is suitable that a girl should feel deeply .
“ after your despair of yesterday !
mr beebe opened the door , saying :
where was i ?
“ what did you throw in ?
“ i did not .
they have sinned against eros and against pallas athene , and not by any heavenly intervention , but by the ordinary course of nature , those allied deities will be avenged .
she refused vehemently .
“ but my feelings are of no importance .
one a boy of nineteen was studying a small manual of anatomy , and peering occasionally at a bone which lay upon the piano .
the armour of falsehood is subtly wrought out of darkness , and hides a man not only from others , but from his own soul .
perhaps italy bores him ;
why this hushing up and tip-toeing ?
but i can .
her own name was eleanor .
“ hush , dear , ” said mrs honeychurch .
then he brings us here , and we find it is to play some silly trick on a kind neighbour .
we will talk it over before bed-time in my room .
“ now , mother !
only i had better tell you the whole truth , since you have heard a little it was that he is so masterful .
charlotte didn’t like it , and said something quite politely , of course .
you will never forgive me .
“ i only was told that he loved you last sunday .
come .
whenever mr beebe crossed the ridge and caught sight of these noble dispositions of the earth , and , poised in the middle of them , windy corner , he laughed .
how very odd !
st .
it is probably a long cry from them to friends of mr vyse’s .
i don’t blame him or any one .
“ it’s a song that cecil gave her .
he hesitated a moment , but went down the garden as requested .
“ is that house to let again , powell ?
“ how very kind you have been !
he suggested that his hostess was mistaken .
i cannot live without you , no good ,’ i thought ;
when i am very happy ” she kissed him “ i remember on how little it all hangs .
the compact that he made with miss bartlett in the tavern , was to help not only lucy , but religion also .
“ however , ” said the girl , despising her cousin’s shiftiness , “ what’s done’s done .
freddy dropped the waistcoat at their feet , and dashed into some bracken .
“ i might have known there would have been these dreadful explanations .
i will superintend the move .
“ they are worth it .
you love george !
the late mr honeychurch had affected the cube , because it gave him the most accommodation for his money , and the only addition made by his widow had been a small turret , shaped like a rhinoceros’ horn , where she could sit in wet weather and watch the carts going up and down the road .
but let yourself go .
san miniato beautiful as well as interesting ;
but it has frightened you , and you may not have noticed that i love you .
mr beebe , distressed at this heavy reception of cissie and albert , determined to shift the subject .
dear girl , forgive my prosiness ;
bursting in on young people !
real menace belongs to the drawing-room .
that amiable hostelry possesses a verandah , in which the young and the unwise do dearly love to sit , while guests of more mature years seek a pleasant sanded room , and have tea at a table comfortably .
the man was ill-bred he hadn’t put on his coat after tennis he didn’t do .
there , now you’re shocked .
of course , athens is a plunge , and the doctor has ordered her special digestive bread ;
she would not be drawn into an elaborate speech .
there was the parapet , there the river , there to the left the beginnings of the hills .
he was phaethon in tuscany driving a cab .
the greatest lesson , some people will tell you , that our earthly life provides .
“ surely no !
and i , even i , have found tenants for the distressful cissie villa .
three notice-boards , belonging to dorking agents , lolled on her fence and announced the not surprising fact .
i suppose it is one’s being so tired .
to her surprise , he seemed annoyed .
“ we are most grateful to you , ” she was saying .
with his bald head and retreating chin !
i can show you a beautiful picture in my italian diary :
(a pity in art of course signified the nude .) giorgione’s “ tempesta , ” the “ idolino , ” some of the sistine frescoes and the apoxyomenos , were added to it .
as he helped her out of the carriage , she said :
don’t you long to be in rome ?
your mother may take quite a long drive now that she is not hampered with me .
“ yes .
how could she find her way about in santa croce ?
“ most right of her .
it was santa croce .
only sovereigns and pennies .
for instance , what right had i to make friends with miss lavish ?
if you do want to go out alone , won’t you be better on your feet ?
and miss lavish , whose nature was attracted by anything problematical , had become equally enthusiastic .
we had a long talk yesterday .
” she opened the book .
“ and where did you meet mr vyse , who is going to marry miss honeychurch ?
“ to all intents and purposes he murdered her .
the reader may have detected an unfortunate slip in it .
“ oh , cecil !
seriously , what do you think of this greek plan ?
she was glad that a visit to mrs vyse now fell due ;
but it would hurt a little less if i knew why .
” he pulled out the letter again .
so it was that after the gropings and the misgivings of the afternoon they pulled themselves together and settled down to a very pleasant tea-party .
” and the conversation died off into a wrangle .
mr eager took the trouble to tell him that he was a liar .
lucy had done so never .
“ not content with permission’ , which i did give that is to say , i said , i don’t mind’ well , not content with that , he wanted to know whether i wasn’t off my head with joy .
“ miss honeychurch happened to be passing through as it happened .
“ we are friendly as one is in pensions .
she also felt that her mother might not like her talking to that kind of person , and that charlotte would object most strongly .
whatever has happened ?
” said mr beebe at last , “ i insist on extracting tea before evening service .
“ we had much better let the matter drop .
poor boy !
those gossiping little miss alans must have ” she checked herself .
” she called everywhere ;
she saw that he was laughing at their harmless neighbour , and roused herself to stop him .
“ charlotte , you mustn’t spoil me :
in the tumult of her soul , that stood firm .
that was a great misfortune , and i dare say you have told them already .
“ you kiss me , ” said the girl .
“ you have never met these miss alans , have you , mr vyse ?
if i do feel it coming on i shall stand .
it is full of the very nicest people .
the marriage was so near that it must have been a hard struggle before she could wind herself up to speak .
“ if minnie sleeps in the bath .
mr eager could not resist the opportunity for erudition .
standing at its brink , like a swimmer who prepares , was the good man .
“ you acted very naturally , ” said he .
that was really what brought me over .
cecil rejoined her ;
yet in their heart of hearts they are how superficial !
“ how dare you !
in this house one is so coached in the servants the day one arrives .
there were also beggars to avoid and guides to dodge round the pillars , and an old lady with her dog , and here and there a priest modestly edging to his mass through the groups of tourists .
“ because otherwise ” she pulled out her bonnet-pins with gathering displeasure “ because otherwise i cannot account for him .
you naturally seek out things italian , and so do we and our friends .
” they turned .
“ well , i am no prude .
“ and then ?
what a lovely frock !
“ bad dreams ?
let’s go to mudie’s .
i cannot even talk to you .
“ then i ask you may i now ?
she was unprepared for the question .
i didn’t follow it at all ;
i am not of your creed , but i do believe in those who make their fellow-creatures happy .
like his sister and like most young people , he was naturally attracted by the idea of equality , and the undeniable fact that there are different kinds of emersons annoyed him beyond measure .
thank you both so much for all your kindness .
she watched the tourists ;
“ her music always was wonderful .
“ take care my watch !
when he was introduced he understood why , for miss honeychurch , disjoined from her music stool , was only a young lady with a quantity of dark hair and a very pretty , pale , undeveloped face .
“ the train to rome .
“ she is my idea of a really clever woman , ” said miss bartlett .
the book , as if it had not worked mischief enough , had been forgotten , and cecil must go back for it ;
“ the chapel is somewhat small for two parties .
dear george reads german .
in his ordinary voice , so that she scarcely realized he was quoting poetry , he said :
he heard her in silence , and then said :
one launched into enthusiasms only to collapse gracefully , and pick oneself up amid sympathetic laughter .
i want to invoke every kind of blessing on them , grave and gay , great and small .
“ late last night .
“ certainly , ” said the hostess wearily .
if the emersons heard i had complained of them , they would think themselves of importance , which is exactly what they are not .
i do so want to know .
miss bartlett and miss honeychurch , who were at tunbridge wells when you helped the vicar of st .
would she tell an actual lie when it came to the point ?
oxon .) , that was the only other decoration of the wall .
i’ve this minute seen him .
i meant that .
lucy mumbled that those seemed very odd people opposite .
“ ma buoni uomini .
do you refer to lorenzo il magnifico , or to lorenzo , duke of urbino , or to lorenzo surnamed lorenzino on account of his diminutive stature ?
” miss bartlett asked .
“ oh , yes i suppose so no not very cheerful , i suppose .
” said mr eager , elegantly waving his hand over his head .
i must suffer and grow old away from him .
i’m sick of florence .
mr beebe felt bound to assist his young friend , and led the way out of the house and into the pine-woods .
her lips parted , and she took him in her arms .
mr beebe poked at a crumb with his knife .
would you come too ?
you must marry , or your life will be wasted .
you talk as if i was a kind of poetess sort of person .
but she thought it an admirable idea for lucy , who hated shopping , changing money , fetching letters , and other irksome duties all of which miss bartlett must accomplish this morning and could easily accomplish alone .
miss bartlett considered .
the further one descended the garden , the more glorious was this lateral view .
you won’t talk about this business , i know .
“ i have heard , ” she said .
“ there came from his lips no wordy protestation such as formal lovers use .
“ beautiful ?
“ but , charlotte , you know what happened then .
and though miss bartlett and miss lavish had planned all the morning how the people were to sit , at the critical moment when the carriages came round they lost their heads , and miss lavish got in with lucy , while miss bartlett , with george emerson and mr beebe , followed on behind .
children tried to hang on behind , and the conductor , with no malice , spat in their faces to make them let go .
he ventured to differ , however , about the corinthian columns which were to cling like leeches to the frames of the bow windows , saying that , for his part , he liked to relieve the façade by a bit of decoration .
three months later , on the margin of italy , among the flower-clad alps , he had asked her again in bald , traditional language .
“ not for me , thank you , ” said cecil .
” but sunday intervened and stamped heavily upon the kindly suggestion .
but by the time george was well she was ill .
he was silent .
the sadness of the incomplete the sadness that is often life , but should never be art throbbed in its disjected phrases , and made the nerves of the audience throb .
“ but i do think lucy might have got this off her chest in italy .
mr vyse is an ideal bachelor .’ i was very cute , i asked him what he meant .
mr eager sat opposite , trying to catch her eye ;
“ do you , by any chance , know the name of an old man who sat opposite us at dinner ?
italiam petimus :
“ what happened ?
she hastened after her cousin , who had already disappeared through the curtains curtains which smote one in the face , and seemed heavy with more than cloth .
i wish you would keep to the point .
but a wind down the side streets cut like a knife , didn’t it ?
“ and then he wants to give up his house to the miss alans .
“ i am glad he is sorry .
each time that old mr emerson and lucy set it erect it collapsed with a roar .
look .
cuthbert eager , m .
how i do hope he’ll get some vulgar tenant in that villa some woman so really vulgar that he’ll notice it .
” he persisted .
oh yes young people must decide for themselves .
“ it is absolutely necessary , ” she continued , lowering her veil and whispering through it with a passion , an intensity , that surprised him .
“ and what is the plot ?
“ you are very fortunate , ” said mr beebe .
lucy felt that she had been selfish .
and lastly , to complete the catalogue of memorable things , on the red book mentioned previously .
what was the name ?
mrs honeychurch , who looked cross , was tying them up , while miss bartlett , unsuitably dressed , impeded her with offers of assistance .
her long , narrow head drove backwards and forwards , as though demolishing some invisible obstacle .
she had never encouraged him .
she sat close to her cousin , who , with commendable patience , was listening to a long story about lost luggage .
“ you must excuse me if i say stupid things , but my brain has gone to pieces .
“ the world , ” she thought , “ is certainly full of beautiful things , if only i could come across them .
it seems to me ” dreamily ;
“ then never never never more shall eleanor lavish be a friend of mine .
” she spread out her knees and perched her card-case on her lap .
“ oh , but i shall die !
george attended gravely , assenting or dissenting with slight but determined gestures that were as inexplicable as the motions of the tree-tops above their heads .
then she lay on her back and gazed at the cloudless sky .
then , why did she risk the meeting ?
“ may i ask what you intend to gain by this exhibition ?
“ oh , all right , ” said george , impassive .
“ i saw nothing in it .
the unfortunate girl returned .
it is the neglected italians who attract me , and whose lives i am going to paint so far as i can .
“ lucy , don’t desert us go on playing bumble-puppy .
“ they’re nothing to me .
“ my father ” he looked up at her (and he was a little flushed) “ says that there is only one perfect view the view of the sky straight over our heads , and that all these views on earth are but bungled copies of it .
” she murmured , and opened her eyes .
” but her own answer , though more normal in its wording , had been to the same effect .
i don’t know how girls manage things , but she can’t have said no’ properly before , or she wouldn’t have to say it again now .
that doesn’t count .
“ let me introduce mr honeychurch , a neighbour .
“ well , you sound tired , as if something has worried you .
“ water’s wonderful .
miss bartlett ignored the remark .
cecil wondered at himself .
how wet it is !
“ in what way ?
a few people lingered round and praised her playing , but finding that she made no reply , dispersed to their rooms to write up their diaries or to sleep .
how do things get round ?
“ it is .
she reminded him of a leonardo more than ever ;
andate presto , presto !
“ but we fear him for you , dear .
i will say no more .
suddenly she laughed ;
mr beebe accepted the convenient word , not without a slight twitching of the lips .
lucy had not attended either .
“ i am eating it , thank you , and enjoying it .
“ what would have happened if i hadn’t arrived ?
the hour was approaching at which the continental breakfast begins , or rather ceases , to tell , and the ladies bought some hot chestnut paste out of a little shop , because it looked so typical .
“ give george my love once only .
” said miss bartlett , as soon as he had gone .
freddy , now full of geniality , whistled the wedding march .
they passed together through the gaunt beauty of the square , laughing over the unpractical suggestion .
“ i didn’t know what to do with them , ” he cried , and his voice was that of an anxious boy .
charlotte had repulsed him with much small talk .
“ why shouldn’t i laugh ?
” she was bewildered , and obeyed him .
“ i can’t even remember the difference between a parish council and a local government board .
“ i think we had better leave lucy to herself , and to her own pursuits .
“ who is she ?
yours is a glorious country , honeychurch !
all the way home the horses’ hoofs sang a tune to her :
courage courage and faith .
and music itself dissolved to a whisper through pine-trees , where the song is not distinguishable from the comic song .
“ yes , but you won’t go back to london .
“ i came here with miss lavish , who was to explain everything ;
“ he was not driving us well , ” she said .
fortunately one of the little old ladies , who for some time had been smiling very benignly , now approached and asked if she might be allowed to sit where mr beebe had sat .
she had not been attending .
he bounces better than the beautiful white devil .
” called out cecil .
“ sunset .
“ they do say so .
it has a strange power , for it compels not only the lips , but the very heart .
“ the name of this ball is vittoria corombona , please .
“ hardly any , ” said lucy , fearful of being thought a snob .
“ and agitate and scream , and be carried off kicking by the police .
“ oh , but that is the word of a craven !
a little scene ensued , which , as miss bartlett said afterwards , was most unpleasant .
the procession disappeared without a word .
” he murmured .
“ cecil happened to read out the passage aloud to me and to mr emerson ;
freddy had half a quid and his friend had four half-crowns .
quite possible .
so she assumed a dazed expression when he spoke to her , and then said :
he did not omit to do so .
you’ll forgive me when you hear it all .
why , on this day of all others , was he so hopelessly contrary ?
“ lost !
“ she must not stop here a moment , and we must keep quiet till she goes .
when the maid opened the door , she was unable to speak , and stared stupidly into the hall .
“ not that .
“ i hardly know george , for he hasn’t learnt to talk yet .
“ oh , rubbish , miss honeychurch !
he warned miss pole of her stomach-acidity , he called it and he may have meant to be kind .
perseus and judith , hercules and thusnelda , they have done or suffered something , and though they are immortal , immortality has come to them after experience , not before .
“ i don’t quite understand .
i shall take her up to tea at the beehive tavern , if i may .
” he exclaimed .
“ how very odd of him !
“ cecil !
dear lucy , i am much worried , and i advise you to make a clean breast of his past behaviour to your mother , freddy , and mr vyse , who will forbid him to enter the house , etc .
wishing to round off the episode , he added ;
“ what was that ?
i shall only say things that will make me unhappy afterwards .
the train service has improved a fatal improvement , to my mind .
it was a new light on cecil’s character .
“ i will not shake hands with him .
she was prepared for all of these .
“ lucy , don’t screech .
“ lucy , ” said her mother , when they got home , “ is anything the matter with cecil ?
“ mrs vyse and her son have gone to rome , ” said lucy , giving the news that interested her least .
“ if only mr emerson was more tactful !
and if you dislike charlotte so , it’s rather a pity you asked her to stop .
i rather mistrust young men who slip into life gracefully .
” gasped lucy , with the roaring of waters in her ears .
they picked violets and filled all the vases in the room of these very miss alans who have failed to come to cissie villa .
we wish to converse on high topics unsuited for your ear .
“ that i deny .
for good or for evil , lucy was left to face her problem alone .
“ but as you do , i suppose it is all right .
“ no !
but italy worked some marvel in her .
“ so you’re off for a minute , mr vyse ?
“ i was hoping you’d come .
” said mrs honeychurch .
a few days after the engagement was announced mrs honeychurch made lucy and her fiasco come to a little garden-party in the neighbourhood , for naturally she wanted to show people that her daughter was marrying a presentable man .
“ that’s exactly what i say .
we women go maundering on .
i met them abroad .
george said it was his old room .
lucy was bewildered .
even the exclusion of the dirty did not leave them much distinction .
therefore cecil was welcome to bring the emersons into the neighbourhood .
she could not modulate out the key of self-abasement in which she had started .
he beamed at them knowingly , said , “ aha !
“ nothing , dearest ;
for a moment the original trouble was in the background .
but they still looked disapproval , and she so far conceded to mr beebe as to say that she would only go for a little walk , and keep to the street frequented by tourists .
“ we are in luck .
charlotte alone she was sure of charlotte , whose exterior concealed so much insight and love .
i must have a word with him !
“ i am glad that you approve .
“ stomach .
surely it was better not to speak until i felt certain .
it broke ;
he did not laugh at me when i had gone .
the old man is just as nice and kind as he can be .
the chief parallel to compare one great thing with another is the power over us of a temple of some alien creed .
“ but this room reminds me of charlotte .
“ i see now why you wanted me to tell cecil , and what you meant by some other source .’ you knew that you had told miss lavish , and that she was not reliable .
she shook her head .
“ some of the people can only see the empty grave , not the saint , whoever he is , going up .
as for lucy and cecil , for whom the temple had been built , they also joined in the merry ritual , but waited , as earnest worshippers should , for the disclosure of some holier shrine of joy .
all her barbed civilities came forth wrong end first .
standing there , he had seen that view of the val d’arno and distant florence , which he afterwards had introduced not very effectively into his work .
she turned to george :
i had a long and most unsatisfactory interview with dear lucy this morning .
i hate him .
” cried the girl , with real warmth .
“ you had that bad headache yesterday all right ” for she had exclaimed indignantly :
“ it was my intention to say very little , ” was his frigid reply .
that is my poor opinion .
” he asked the vicar afterwards .
“ silly boy !
that word seemed to sum up the whole of life .
“ don’t be rude , dear , ” said his mother placidly .
“ no , it isn’t , ” said lucy ;
it’s only a puddle now , but you see that stream going through it ?
the father did not see it ;
looking very cross and almost handsome ?
i must go .
her anger faded at the sight of him .
he seems a nice creature , and i think he has brains .
mr beebe chirruped .
“ he isn’t clever , but really he is nice .
bring them back to tea .
intolerable bishop !
they seldom keep their exploits to themselves .
you were devoted to her as a little girl , and nothing will describe her goodness to you through the typhoid fever .
one from her mother , delightful as only her mother’s letters could be .
as he touched her , his gold pince-nez became dislodged and was flattened between them .
he looked amazed at the request , and said in a low , stern voice :
the things are assuredly not of this life ;
“ perhaps , ” she murmured , thinking of the museum that represented italy to her .
why sit wriggling and sneering and spoiling everyone’s pleasure ?
i intend to be unmerciful to the british tourist .
they won’t mind a bump or two , and i’ve ordered new balls .
george still dark , all the tussle and the misery without a word from him .
“ hullo !
i hate him .
she thought they were commercial travellers drummers’ was the word she used and all through dinner she tried to prove that england , our great and beloved country , rests on nothing but commerce .
oh , it is a shame !
i’ll bet you anything you like .
” she looked at the two rows of english people who were sitting at the table ;
” the clergyman continued , scrambling about the room .
but it is not easy to carry the pictures of alessio baldovinetti in your head , even if you have remembered to look at them before starting .
“ a nice fellow , ” said mr beebe afterwards “ he will work off his crudities in time .
the well-known world had broken up , and there emerged florence , a magic city where people thought and did the most extraordinary things .
“ are they that sort ?
” and offered him a franc .
“ lucy , do you mind doing it ?
lucy had said she would join the vyses mrs vyse was an acquaintance of her mother , so there was no impropriety in the plan and miss bartlett had replied that she was quite used to being abandoned suddenly .
and , indeed , a perfect torrent of information burst on them .
” and down the garden he saw lucy herself ;
indirectly , by means of tact and a spotless name , a lady could accomplish much .
she puzzled out the italian notices the notices that forbade people to introduce dogs into the church the notice that prayed people , in the interest of health and out of respect to the sacred edifice in which they found themselves , not to spit .
yet , have you ever noticed that there are people who do things which are most indelicate , and yet at the same time beautiful ?
then they spoke of other things the desultory talk of those who have been fighting to reach one another , and whose reward is to rest quietly in each other’s arms .
part of it lives three minutes back , when i was sure that you loved me , and the other part i find it difficult i am likely to say the wrong thing .
all her sensations , her spasms of courage , her moments of unreasonable joy , her mysterious discontent , should be carefully laid before her cousin .
it was too dreadful not to know whether she was thinking right or wrong .
no , that’s enough , freddy .
other houses were built on the brow of that steep southern slope and others , again , among the pine-trees behind , and northward on the chalk barrier of the downs .
it is all he can do to keep polite .
“ why , you did !
but surely i have a right to hear a little more .
once more music appeared to her the employment of a child .
“ every one writes for money in these days .
cecil was very kind indeed ;
“ eccolo !
they began to sort their clothes for packing , for there was no time to lose , if they were to catch the train to rome .
i have always longed to go to constantinople .
yes .
“ but it will all come right in the end .
” asked miss bartlett .
by a cruel irony she was drawing out all that was finest in his disposition .
the comic muse , though able to look after her own interests , did not disdain the assistance of mr vyse .
“ i am more grieved than i can possibly express .
he was bewildered .
miss bartlett at once came forward , and after a long preamble asked a great favour :
this narrows the field immeasurably we meet again in it .
she went into the drawing-room , and mr beebe heard her kiss lucy and say :
she rejected it , and said :
“ i answered no’ ” said the boy , grinding his teeth .
how those horrid conservatives would jeer at us !
we’ve both made a muddle of it .
” he rebelled , and tried to substitute for it the society he called broad .
what ever did you say ?
beyond them stood the unreliable signora , bowing good-evening to her guests , and supported by ’enery , her little boy , and victorier , her daughter .
leaning forward , she looked out into the steaming dusk , and watched the carriage-lamp pass like a search-light over mud and leaves , and reveal nothing beautiful .
“ hullo , emerson !
“ mrs honeychurch , ” he said , “ go to greece she must .
at the row of white bottles of water and red bottles of wine that ran between the english people ;
he saw radiant joy in her face , he saw the flowers beat against her dress in blue waves .
as teresa truly said , it was no laughing matter .
passion should believe itself irresistible .
up in the house cecil heard them , and , though he was full of entertaining news , he did not come down to impart it , in case he got hurt .
“ in a book ?
miss lavish spoke to it dramatically .
“ but my point is that their whole attitude is wrong .
she hopes to find the true italy in the wet i believe .
look how she kept me alive in you all the summer ;
.
“ beauchamp mansions , s .w .
it was the hour of unreality the hour , that is , when unfamiliar things are real .
“ i forget why harmony or something .
“ what is to be done ?
come and have a bathe .
i shan’t again be troubled by things that come out of nothing , and mean i don’t know what .
he tried to get right by inquiring effusively after mr beebe’s mother , an old lady for whom he had no particular regard .
so lucy felt , or strove to feel .
he smiled , flung himself at them , splashed them , ducked them , kicked them , muddied them , and drove them out of the pool .
a solution seemed in sight , and even cecil , who had been ostentatiously drinking his tea at the view , felt the eternal attraction of chance , and turned round .
but what else can you expect from a church ?
“ i want your advice .
for it was in ominous tones that she said , after a long pause :
“ to contradict it ?
“ it is so .
not so far either .
i don’t think so .
after a few words her eyes grew alert , and soon she interrupted him with “ going abroad ?
” mrs honeychurch followed her , and they drove away .
one looked down one’s nose at this .
“ in there’s the pond .
“ shall we go out , then .
a detailed exhibition of her emotions was all that she had counted upon .
the case of lucy was different .
i was bound up in the old vicious notions , and all the time you were splendid and new .
did you say you had had a letter from charlotte ?
his idea of bringing the emersons to windy corner struck her as decidedly good , and she carried through the negotiations without a hitch .
he appealed to lucy ;
“ it makes a difference doesn’t it , whether we fully fence ourselves in , or whether we are fenced out by the barriers of others ?
just gone under .
” and he looked with unwavering eyes at the rows of books , as if at what cost !
when i think what life is , and how seldom love is answered by love marry him ;
being strong physically , she soon overcame the horror of blood .
i have seen so little of life ;
“ yes , very , ” said freddy , taking up a book .
this afternoon she was peculiarly restive .
“ we are all so glad that you have come .
“ perfectly well absolutely well .
“ i don’t see you ought to go peeping like that .
“ i quite agree .
he held up his hand .
she liked music , but how much better tennis seemed .
when my cousin and i were at the pitti yesterday what was that ?
oh , a view !
but there we go , praising the one and condemning the other as improper , ashamed that the same laws work eternally through both .
.full of innate sympathy .
“ joseph emery prank’ indeed !
cecil and lucy turned up at four o’clock , and these , with little minnie beebe , made a somewhat lugubrious sextette upon the upper lawn for tea .
“ it is only a pond , don’t you know .
“ this is me .
“ we mustn’t be unjust to people , ” faltered lucy .
” she pleaded .
“ i should be astonished if you knew all .
” she rose to her feet “ conventional , cecil , you’re that , for you may understand beautiful things , but you don’t know how to use them ;
no , give me up that sovereign .
“ she wanted to leave windy corner .
and call it work when thousands of men are starving with the competition as it is !
lucy won’t marry him .
“ so george says .
of course he knew where .
no , lucy , the classes ought to mix , and before long you’ll agree with me .
you might help me .
to her tired eyes charlotte throbbed and swelled like a ghostly figure in a dream .
when she exclaimed , “ but cecil’s emersons they can’t possibly be the same ones there is that ” he did not consider that the exclamation was strange , but saw in it an opportunity of diverting the conversation while she recovered her composure .
a few days ago and lucy would have felt the same .
obviously he and his father did not do .
she marched cheerfully to the fountain and back , and did a few calculations in realism .
it was the first time her voice had been kind and he smiled .
he looks forward to seeing you this afternoon .
enshadowed , it sprang into tenderness .
siamo sposati .
“ i suggested we should hinder them , ” said mr beebe .
being english , miss honeychurch will be perfectly safe .
it was so sudden .
miss bartlett tapped on the wall .
i knew you’d understand .
“ to greece ?
“ good-bye , cecil .
“ make lucy one of us , ” she said , looking round intelligently at the end of each sentence , and straining her lips apart until she spoke again .
“ to speak plainly , ” said mr eager , “ it is .
“ this is my son , ” said the old man ;
“ i tell you that they shall be , ” said mr emerson , who had been slowly descending the stairs .
if they must take shelter , let it be in a shop .
” lucy poked at the ground with her parasol .
“ i shall want to live , i tell you .
she had told eleanor in the strictest confidence .
i have at last procured really dee-sire-rebel tenants .’ i said , ooray , old boy !’ and slapped him on the back .
the coolness dated from what charlotte would call “ the flight to rome , ” and in rome it had increased amazingly .
now mr eager and miss lavish began to talk against each other on the subject of alessio baldovinetti .
“ i’ve swallowed a pollywog .
it makes such a difference when you see a person with beautiful things behind him unexpectedly .
“ charlotte , how much does mr eager know ?
a shilling was it ?
“ it’s very kind of mr beebe , but i am certainly coming with you .
“ what do you mean ?
is it possible , miss honeychurch ?
“ fifteen shillings , ” said miss bartlett dubiously .
” then with a catching of her breath , she murmured :
i’ll stop at because she tells me everything .’ or shall i cross that out , too ?
he hustled them so quickly that he forgot his hat .
very charming , very charming .
be good !
“ i wonder whether whether it matters so very much .
” she said .
the ladies’ voices grew animated , and if the sad truth be owned a little peevish .
however , mr beebe is a guarantee of a sort that they will not presume on this .
that they puzzle themselves as well as their friends ;
shall i ?
but why not announce it ?
it was unlike her to have entertained anything so subtle .
then there was a row .
“ i’d rather , ” he said reproachfully , “ that you connected me with the open air .
there was a lightning flash , and miss lavish who was nervous , screamed from the carriage in front .
“ no more you have , ” she stammered .
she told teresa and miss pole the other day that she had got up all the local colour this novel is to be about modern italy ;
it did her no harm , cecil thought , to learn the framework of society , while society itself was absent on the golf-links or the moors .
she had nearly joined the party to the torre del gallo .
i know too well that i get on lucy’s nerves .
as the carriage passed , “ cissie’s ” door opened , and a gentleman came out of her .
ow !
yet ” his voice gathered strength :
they are not innumerable .
i’m always right .
one cannot be too careful .
having been mentioned in the first place .
it was dreadful how little she knew , and even when she thought she knew a thing , like the italian painters , she found she had forgotten it .
no one was careful with her at home ;
george was obstinate again .
have you ever heard of lorenzo de medici ?
it was impossible to love her .
“ miss lavish cannot have told you much about me , for i am not at windy corner at all , but here .
“ i think i follow you , ” said sir harry ;
lucy was puzzled .
“ you are conscious of having said something indiscreet ?
gracious me , how smart you look !
absolute strangers .
he daren’t let a woman decide .
“ no , i haven’t told cecil or any one , ” she remarked , when she returned .
“ oh , now and then , ” said lucy , who had rather enjoyed herself .
ahem !
he wanted to feel that others , no matter who they were , agreed with him , and so he had asked their permission .
food is the thing one does get here don’t sit in that chair ;
it might have been very serious .
“ i may as well wash too ” ;
he threw up his head in disdain .
” he stretched them towards her .
“ i suppose mr vyse is very angry with george ?
there was a pause .
he had crept in without interrupting her .
“ i consider that you are bound to class him as nice , miss alan , after that business of the violets .
they read our thoughts , they foretell our desires .
the crucifix that kissed a murderer miss honeychurch would remember the story .
“ very well .
“ yes ;
darkness enveloped the flat .
“ time they did .
” cried lucy , flushing .
“ it’s only the library book that cecil’s been reading .
but lucy seems very uncertain , and in these days young people must decide for themselves .
but he saw a trunk beside the coachman’s legs .
” he asked .
lucy tried to look demure , but could not help feeling a great fool .
“ who are the miss alans ?
ah !
well , a good deal of water comes down after heavy rains , and can’t get away at once , and the pool becomes quite large and beautiful .
he was medieval .
she pretended not to see it .
“ weren’t you pleased ?
who would suppose this is italy ?
he laughs more .
“ and the news ?
the two civilizations had clashed cecil hinted that they might and she was dazzled and bewildered , as though the radiance that lies behind all civilization had blinded her eyes .
i have kept that promise , and cannot possibly tell her now .
as if all this worry about cabs and change had been a ruse to surprise the soul .
that whatever you felt you did not mean .
” exclaimed mr emerson , in much too loud a voice for church .
for a time indeed , for years she had been meaningless , but at the end there was presented to the girl the complete picture of a cheerless , loveless world in which the young rush to destruction until they learn better a shamefaced world of precautions and barriers which may avert evil , but which do not seem to bring good , if we may judge from those who have used them most .
miss bartlett , with equal vivacity , replied :
perhaps there is no difference , or perhaps those aren’t the right names .
” said miss bartlett , much discomfited by the unpleasant scene .
she was conscious of her discontent ;
mr vyse was a tease something worse than a tease :
let those two people go on , or i shall have to speak to them .
there was no one even to tell her which , of all the sepulchral slabs that paved the nave and transepts , was the one that was really beautiful , the one that had been most praised by mr ruskin .
he began to walk up and down the room , and she grew more and more vexed at his dignified behaviour .
there were two plans between which she had to choose .
“ yes , go and bathe , george .
he pressed his finger-tips to his forehead and then pushed them towards her , as if oozing with visible extract of knowledge .
pan had been amongst them not the great god pan , who has been buried these two thousand years , but the little god pan , who presides over social contretemps and unsuccessful picnics .
” she raised her hand to her cheek .
he had wanted her support in his third attempt to win lucy ;
“ thank goodness !
the days of her energy were over .
bring them up among honest country folks for freshness , send them to italy for subtlety , and then not till then let them come to london .
“ he asked me for my permission also .
“ yes , i am , thank you so very much .
“ well , i can’t help it , ” said a voice close ahead , and freddy reared a freckled face and a pair of snowy shoulders out of the fronds .
“ so she says herself , and since another lady agrees with her , i must own that i am partially convinced .
“ no !
we are too different .
” cried a voice from the top of the table .
then cecil said with great emotion :
she obeyed , but loitered disconsolately at the landing window .
the words were indeed remote .
one might have gone back six hundred years .
“ this comes of putting off .
yet they can triumph or despair as the player decides , and lucy had decided that they should triumph .
miss lavish was not disgusted , and said it was just the size of her aunt’s suffolk estate .
but that was not all .
you know the american girl in punch who says :
you might before .
“ i’m so glad you only talked about books .
but i don’t think she ought to have run away with baedeker that morning in santa croce .
“ oh , lucy i shall never forgive myself , never to my dying day .
“ and a cockney , besides !
“ go on .
“ thank you , mother ;
it’s a new bad habit you’re getting into .
she thinks i can’t make out .
” so ran his belief , and he never heard that an engagement was broken off but with a slight feeling of pleasure .
to whom do you refer ?
the desire for education and for social advance in these things there is something not wholly vile .
it was his own fault that she was discussing him with his mother ;
it seemed no longer a tower , no longer supported by earth , but some unattainable treasure throbbing in the tranquil sky .
“ isn’t mr eager a parson of the cultured type ?
a conversation then ensued , on not unfamiliar lines .
“ socker rules , ” george retorted , scattering freddy’s bundle with a kick .
the sketch was in his diary , but it had been made afterwards , when he viewed things artistically .
will you ?
schumann was the thing .
“ one doesn’t come to italy for niceness , ” was the retort ;
lucy selected a book a volume of old testament commentaries .
a very wet afternoon at the bertolini permitted her to do the thing she really liked , and after lunch she opened the little draped piano .
“ because i do hope he won’t go gossiping .
it struck her that she might slip into the passage and just say that she would be gone before he was up , and that their extraordinary intercourse was over .
“ lucy , you come and look at the cypresses ;
” she looked at him cautiously .
“ i suppose i do generally .
it was , i believe , chiefly owing to him that the old man was dropped .
“ i consider him far above the average .
sir harry blushed .
holding it up to her eyes , she said :
but lucy remembered the vendor of photographs and said , “ no , don’t be rude to him .
she could not have believed that stones , a loggia , a fountain , a palace tower , would have such significance .
she had not really appreciated the clergyman’s wit , nor the suggestive twitterings of miss alan .
“ i represent all that he despises .
but i insist on paying for my cab up .
i want them all their lives to be supremely good and supremely happy as husband and wife , as father and mother .
” said the boy , who was freddy , lucy’s brother .
it’s much pleasanter .
“ oh , good gracious , there isn’t going to be another muddle !
“ all the galleries are shut .
“ in the nave .
“ just what i’ve been trying to convince cousin charlotte of , lucy , for the last half hour .
“ i didn’t realize that you and the miss alans were still such friends , after cissie villa .
his cassock was covered with rain .
“ but you tell her everything ?
” exclaimed the voice of old mr emerson , who had darted forward also .
“ something too awful has happened , ” she began , as soon as her cousin arrived .
how dare you say no ?
he left them , carefully closing the front door ;
they chose to regard it as a miraculous preservation , and the floods of love and sincerity , which fructify every hour of life , burst forth in tumult .
they were piled on the tables , they pressed against the very ceiling .
“ oh , mrs honeychurch ” from the upper regions .
miss lavish had lost miss bartlett .
” flashed lucy in her turn , pierced at last by a vivid pain .
” exclaimed cecil , almost before they were out of earshot .
how little , we feel , avails knowledge and technical cleverness against a man who truly feels !
miss honeychurch bowed .
lost !
” murmured freddy , appalled at the mass of philosophy that was approaching him .
” she retorted , kindling at once .
lucy at once re-entered daily life .
“ how silly of them !
her promise brought the long-drawn interview to a sudden close .
she was not to be trapped by pathos a second time .
mr beebe had lost everyone , and had consumed in solitude the tea-basket which he had brought up as a pleasant surprise .
unselfishness with miss bartlett had entirely usurped the functions of enthusiasm .
miss bartlett looked in her purse .
mr emerson was talking about it in the smoking-room , and knowing what i did , i encouraged him to make the offer again .
mr flack replied that all the columns had been ordered , adding , “ and all the capitals different one with dragons in the foliage , another approaching to the ionian style , another introducing mrs flack’s initials every one different .
it was mr beebe who started the stamping ;
“ i know , ” said george , and put his arm round his father’s neck .
“ hullo !
“ how do you do ?
charlotte charlotte .
she sidled towards them and sat down , self-conscious as she always was on entering a room which contained one man , or a man and one woman .
our tour was a failure .
“ charlotte again , my dear ;
“ i’m sorry if you could manage without it , i think i would rather not .
buon giorno !
i’m only thinking of my pet theory about miss honeychurch .
they feel and produce discomfort wherever they go .
” she sat down heavily where the ground looked particularly moist .
“ poor lucy ” she stretched out her hand .
“ just listen to what i have written to mrs vyse .
“ oh , freddy’s a good sort , isn’t he ?
but i cannot see why you didn’t tell your friends about cecil and be done with it .
lucy again felt that this did not do .
“ difference ?
for one ravishing moment italy appeared .
“ they are lovely .
“ why shouldn’t you ?
he had thrown her photographs into it , and then he had told her the reason .
will you shake hands ?
“ then make my boy think like us .
she had alienated windy corner , perhaps for ever .
he stood .
and what were you saying about going abroad ?
he walked home with her unashamed , feeling not at all like a rejected suitor .
in the garden , mrs honeychurch , now helped by freddy , still wrestled with the lives of her flowers .
and poor charlotte has only the water turned off and plumbers .
” her brain expanded the melody :
i love willow-herb in seed .
“ summer street , of course , ” said lucy , and roused herself .
it is useless to contradict me .
“ do you really want this bathe ?
” he cried .
“ we want your assistance .
” shouted mrs honeychurch as she toiled up the sloping garden .
“ our visitors never do such dreadful things , ” said lucy , while her brother , in whose memory the boiled egg had already grown unsubstantial , exclaimed in irritable tones :
to behave wildly at the sight of death is pardonable .
“ just fancy how small the world is .
they continued to pack in silence .
unless you feel that it is a thing you could not tell her .
but miss lavish had said so much about knowing her florence by heart , that lucy had followed her with no misgivings .
how would she fight against ghosts ?
peter’s that very cold easter .
a baby hurt , cold , and frightened !
at last she spoke , and with fitting gravity .
miss honeychurch as a kite , miss bartlett holding the string .
“ mr beebe , could you help me ?
can’t i look out of my own window ?
let us get this over quickly .
” said he , with a martyred look at lucy .
why not have a comfortable bath at home , with hot and cold laid on ?
“ just dreams .
as she was dozing off , a cry the cry of nightmare rang from lucy’s room .
i forget why ;
“ i could as easily tell you what tune she’ll play next .
“ i didn’t know that miss honeychurch sang , too .
“ i never notice much difference in views .
he walked out and left them .
i can’t believe he’s well .
“ do you know about it , please ?
evidently mrs honeychurch was shattered .
but , once in the open air , she paused .
” cried lucy , wincing under the horrible plural .
cecil’s voice came :
at that supreme moment he was conscious of nothing but absurdities .
while george , the world-weary george , shouted to freddy that he had hooked a fish .
but alas !
perhaps the song stated “ the better part ” rather too strongly .
george has been working very hard at his office .
they conferred in the dining-room for half an hour .
she said yes , she was glad too ;
the miss alans were duly offended , and wrote a dignified letter to lucy , whom they held responsible for the failure .
for a moment she understood the nature of ghosts .
we despise the body less than women do .
you’d go openly if you were .
“ no , i agree , ” said miss lavish .
” said the old man , with both fists on the table .
charlotte , with the complacency of fate , led her from the river to the piazza signoria .
“ you were ready enough at the bertolini when you rushed me off to rome .
“ no nothing to eat .
but i meet you again when all the world is glorious water and sun .
hadn’t i better ?
ugh !
lucy desired more .
you forget the place is growing half suburban .
some great mansions were at hand , but they were hidden in the trees .
“ but look at lucy complaining of saturn , and all the time’s got the beautiful white devil in her hand , ready to plug it in .
men were not gods after all , but as human and as clumsy as girls ;
he had thrown something into the stream .
it was tiresome of charlotte to have stopped exactly where she did .
“ can’t we have the hood down ?
mr beebe laid his hand on the old man’s shoulder pleasantly .
“ murdered his wife ?
i think i will sit in the carriage .
“ well , ” said he , “ i cannot help it if they do disapprove of me .
on the subject of “ church and so on ” they had had rather an unsatisfactory conversation .
“ mr emerson , go and find tennis balls .
he addressed the driver again .
mr beebe , who was an adept at relieving situations , invited miss bartlett to accompany them to this mild festivity .
by some mysterious virtue , which mothers alone possess , she stiffened the little boy’s back-bone and imparted strength to his knees .
fly into a stew !
” he thought , raising his eyebrows .
i can trust you both .
“ i know .
“ exploits ?
” venus , being a pity , spoilt the picture , otherwise so charming , and miss bartlett had persuaded her to do without it .
by his tact and common sense , and by his influence as a clergyman for a clergyman who was not a fool influenced mrs honeychurch greatly he bent her to their purpose , “ i don’t see why greece is necessary , ” she said ;
what could this mean ?
well , i suppose your generation knows its own business , honeychurch .
“ still , freddy never hit it off with vyse much , did he ?
the two men had quarrelled over a five-franc note .
did charlotte mention her boiler ?
it was unladylike .
it’s that mr eager .
“ it has broken now , ” said the young man in low , vibrating tones .
her sunburnt features were shadowed by fantastic rock ;
the neighbourhood is deprived of the romance of me being athletic .
for a little time the voice of old mr emerson pursued them dispensing good wishes and philosophy .
the same eternal worrying , the same taking back of words .
among the promised items was “ miss honeychurch .
i will inflict joseph emery prank on you no longer .
george replied :
run up and hurry her .
there are still left some men who can reverence woman .
“ thank you , charlotte , ” said lucy , and pondered over the offer .
she was thinking , “ my daughter won’t answer me ;
miss bartlett , who had really been neither pliable nor humble nor inconsistent .
they had no money to throw away on driving .
i blush when i think how i interfered at florence , and you so well able to look after yourself , and so much cleverer in all ways than i am .
dear mrs vyse , cecil has just asked my permission about it , and i should be delighted , if lucy wishes it .
she had nothing to do .
in all that expanse no human eye is looking at her , and she may frown unrebuked and measure the spaces that yet survive between apollo and the western hills .
as you well remarked this very morning , there are some chaps who are no good for anything but books’ ;
what it was and exactly how the players had sided , lucy was slow to discover .
“ oh , look don’t look !
“ water’s wonderful !
choose a place where you won’t do harm yes , choose a place where you won’t do very much harm , and stand in it for all you are worth , facing the sunshine .
good ?
now , as in the winter , the pine-trees hung close to her eyes .
she laughed heartily .
“ oh , what a funny thing !
it upset mr emerson and he insulted me again .
but the drivers , through miles of dark squalid road , poured out their souls to the dryads and the saints , and lucy poured out hers to her cousin .
inside , perfect seclusion .
the original ghost that touch of lips on her cheek had surely been laid long ago ;
she opened the discussion with :
he said to me :
” but the bell was ringing for lunch , and , as often happened , cecil had paid no great attention to her remarks .
but now she should alter .
you came .
how right it was !
sure enough it ended in a cry .
good-bye .
“ but mr eager he came when i was out , and acted according to his principles .
“ charlotte and i will give mr emerson all he wants .
for that man has murdered his wife in the sight of god .
“ i suppose she had a good time ?
“ i don’t understand , ” she said at last .
he seemed in high spirits .
” cried freddy , prancing in .
he meant , “ are you fond of it ?
“ ah , he has too many .
but in its presence and in the presence of each other they were sincerely hilarious .
you all think much too highly of me .
“ perfectly fair .
in this exalted mood they reached the steps of the great church , and were about to enter it when miss lavish stopped , squeaked , flung up her arms , and cried :
“ they’ve gone .
“ it’s clear that she knew .
cecil had evidently taken up the dignified line , and was not going to annoy her .
in the weald , autumn approached , breaking up the green monotony of summer , touching the parks with the grey bloom of mist , the beech-trees with russet , the oak-trees with gold .
windy corner lay , not on the summit of the ridge , but a few hundred feet down the southern slope , at the springing of one of the great buttresses that supported the hill .
i can reach you no other way .
“ there’s plenty of room for us all .
built by faith indeed !
some emotion pity , terror , love , but the emotion was strong seized her , and she was aware of autumn .
it gave lucy the sensation of a fog , and when she reached her own room she opened the window and breathed the clean night air , thinking of the kind old man who had enabled her to see the lights dancing in the arno and the cypresses of san miniato , and the foot-hills of the apennines , black against the rising moon .
a jolly good letter .
and such a wrong may react disastrously upon the soul .
he was playing at nonsense among his peers .
people told them what to see , when to see it , how to stop the electric trams , how to get rid of the beggars , how much to give for a vellum blotter , how much the place would grow upon them .
but we are no farther on with our question .
“ oh , not that way back .
“ no , charlotte !
you naughty girl !
then it struck him that her family itself might be annoying .
“ we dread going to bed .
lucy burst into laughter .
he stepped quickly forward and kissed her .
andate via !
mr emerson had lost george .
” she bowed .
she said :
the sunshine had come too late to strike it .
“ but what are you doing here ?
” cried the chaplain , striking petulantly at one of fra angelico’s angels .
i forbid you and cecil to hate any more clergymen .
but there is a right sort and a wrong sort , and it’s affectation to pretend there isn’t .
the grandchildren asked her to play the piano .
explanations took place , and in the midst of them lucy escaped , the images throbbing a little more vividly in her brain .
“ ah , ” said miss bartlett , repressing lucy , who was about to speak .
they were always in each other’s company , with lucy a slighted third .
“ introduce me , ” said her mother .
was it possible that she had muddled things away ?
those were muddles little , but ominous and i am fearing that you are in one now .
“ i insist on it .
cecil was more than presentable ;
he pressed her very slightly , and she said more .
thus she interpreted her joy .
“ the men say they won’t go ” “ well , i don’t blame them ” minnie says , “ need she go ?
there would be no difficulty .
s .
the sun rose higher on its journey , guided , not by phaethon , but by apollo , competent , unswerving , divine .
“ well , dear , i at all events am ready for bedfordshire .
surely one ought to laugh .
for her taste was catholic , and she extended uncritical approval to every well-known name .
before she reached them she hesitated , turned , and blew out the candle .
she might have spoken further , but they were interrupted by the entrance of her hostess .
“ but , lucy , the whole joke is to come !
how dreadful if she really wished to remain near him !
“ but we have spoilt the pleasure of i don’t know how many people .
the chapel was already filled with an earnest congregation , and out of them rose the voice of a lecturer , directing them how to worship giotto , not by tactful valuations , but by the standards of the spirit .
passion was there , but it could not be easily labelled ;
but perhaps he will come out and join you later on .
now that she was engaged , the emersons would scarcely insult her and were welcome into the neighbourhood .
“ the man is dead the man is probably dead ;
“ by-the-by i never told you .
but to cecil , now that he was about to lose her , she seemed each moment more desirable .
it is your party .
“ it was a novel and i am afraid , from what i can gather , not a very nice novel .
he might make a tavern story out of it .
miss bartlett could not allow this .
he was quiet :
“ not till january , it wasn’t , ” said lucy , clasping her hands .
and i have made you cry !
death is a strong word surely too strong .
miss honeychurch , your brother’s hurting me .
the river was rushing below them , almost black in the advancing night .
why shouldn’t she sit in the sun with the young men ?
suddenly he said :
i can’t tell mother now owing to you .
now , why ?
and miss bartlett , too , essayed the roguish :
” asked lucy .
“ mrs honeychurch , ” he said , “ what if we two walk home and leave you ?
you’ve got rid of cecil well and good , and i’m thankful he’s gone , though i did feel angry for the minute .
“ i move into the rectory at summer street next june .
many thanks .
that’s what i mean .
he forebore to repress the sources of youth .
soon their footsteps returned , and miss bartlett said :
quite so , quite so !
how does she sound ?
it was a blustering day , and the wind had taken and broken the dahlias .
let yourself go .
phaethon hung down his head , not at the matter of the accusation , but at its manner .
his answer was puzzling :
to this extraordinary speech lucy found no answer .
“ how very odd of him !
when they had finished their set , he still went on reading ;
i wish that he did not influence them so much at windy corner .
a horrified look came into his eyes .
for instance , freddy .
the kingdom of music is not the kingdom of this world ;
several days passed .
and his mother , who was writing a letter , did continually read out to him what she had written .
but who was to tell her which they were ?
i know miss honeychurch only a little as time goes .
mr beebe , who loved the art of the past , was reminded of a favourite theme , the santa conversazione , in which people who care for one another are painted chatting together about noble things a theme neither sensual nor sensational , and therefore ignored by the art of to-day .
still , they did not hear mr beebe’s last warning or they would have avoided mrs honeychurch , cecil , and lucy , who were walking down to call on old mrs butterworth .
“ why greece ?
it can .
and collecting stamps did no end of good for my brother .
“ no , i can’t well , never mind the tennis .
she could not understand him ;
perhaps cecil was a little tired .
she too is enamoured of heavy winds , and vast panoramas , and green expanses of the sea .
and you’d better draw the curtain , too ;
i’m so sorry he’s not so well .
either country was spanned by a cloudless sky , and in either arose the tinkle of church bells .
one connected the landing window with depression .
secrecy has this disadvantage :
lucy screwed up her mouth and said :
then he lit another cigarette , which did not seem quite as divine as the first , and considered what might be done to make windy corner drawing-room more distinctive .
“ mother wouldn’t mind i’m sure , ” said lucy , but again had the sense of larger and unsuspected issues .
he could only potter about in these days .
it sometimes seemed as if she planned every word she spoke or caused to be spoken ;
“ i mean , would you not mention it to any one , my foolish behaviour ?
it was pleasant to wake up in florence , to open the eyes upon a bright bare room , with a floor of red tiles which look clean though they are not ;
do you remember that day at lunch when he argued with miss alan that liking one person is an extra reason for liking another ?
and she ought not to have mentioned miss bartlett’s letter .
cecil said , “ yes , ” while freddy edged away .
i must speak .
before she could speak , almost before she could feel , a voice called , “ lucy !
“ no apologies are necessary for the pond .
let’s turn in here .
“ it will be a novel , ” replied mr beebe , “ dealing with modern italy .
to reach his room he had to go by hers .
yet the smirking old women , however wrong individually , were racially correct .
“ well , i see the likeness .
they will smash all the china if we don’t .
and my baby’s worth the whole of paradise , and as far as i can see he lives in hell .
soon the lecturer could be heard in the next chapel , describing the life of st .
“ it is a question between ideals , yours and mine pure abstract ideals , and yours are the nobler .
why all this twiddling and twaddling over two miss alans ?
the door-bell rang , and she started to the shutters .
certainly he does not , or does so very seldom .
“ i shall probably want to live .
he had robbed the body of its taint , the world’s taunts of their sting ;
“ have you heard ?
and every now and then she said a word , and made things no better .
some one said just the same to mother , and she said she trusted i should never live a duet .
i cannot break the whole of life for his sake .
after it as the horrid phrase went she had been exactly the same to him as before .
freddy did not move or reply .
born of silence and of unknown emotion , it passed when mr emerson returned , and she could re-enter the world of rapid talk , which was alone familiar to her .
he held out his hand to pull her up .
she frowns a little not in anger , but as a brave child frowns when he is trying not to cry .
and a blue military cloak , such as an italian officer wears , only increased the sense of festivity .
i know i ought to be getting money out of people , or devoting myself to things i don’t care a straw about , but somehow , i’ve not been able to begin .
he thinks he’s being dignified .
” scraps of the lecture on st .
“ i hope you will excuse me for boring on like this , ” miss lavish concluded .
“ you and are you tired ?
charm , not argument , was to be her forte .
“ eat your dinner , dear , ” she said to lucy , and began to toy again with the meat that she had once censured .
“ i was merely going to remark , freddy , that i trusted they were no relations of emerson the philosopher , a most trying man .
” asked cecil , who took no real interest in them , and had long since forgotten his resolution to bring them to windy corner for educational purposes .
italians understand .
cecil listened civilly , and said he was sure that lucy would be amused and interested .
freddy possessed to a high degree the power of lashing little girls to fury , and in half a minute he had transformed minnie from a well-mannered child into a howling wilderness .
he would improve me in places where i can’t be improved .
“ no , you aren’t .
“ george , i do believe that clergyman is the brixton curate .
“ i won’t be protected .
the ups and downs in his voice were noticeable , but they did not affect her .
grey clouds were charging across tissues of white , which stretched and shredded and tore slowly , until through their final layers there gleamed a hint of the disappearing blue .
the cockney signora and her works had vanished like a bad dream .
but , as i say , this took a little thinking , and so illogical are girls the event remained rather greater and rather more dreadful than it should have done .
i cannot think what came over me .
“ now it is all dark .
we’ll change .
they embraced each other .
let him beware that he does not get more than a snub .
emerson we think we’ll come another time .
“ i wish we could .
“ how ?
miss lavish , i am an early victorian ;
“ yes , indeed !
they had been to italy .
“ now don’t be alarmed ;
“ indeed you may !
” called freddy .
” she was perfectly pleasant and sensible over lucy’s adventure , found the abridged account of it quite adequate , and paid suitable tribute to the courtesy of mr george emerson .
i have always flown in the face of the conventions all my life .
then his voice changed as if every pine-tree was a rural dean .
there , miss lavish , is one who can confute you better than i ,’ and pointed to that beautiful picture of lord tennyson .
seeing that her thoughts were elsewhere , cecil bent towards lucy and said :
he went off singing .
i knew it was all right .
and poor mr beebe , too !
eh ?
now we shall know .
“ i won’t have her .
“ heroes gods the nonsense of schoolgirls .
“ he is not going , ” she said hoarsely .
she thanked him with real pleasure .
pray , what would become of your drive in the hills ?
no , i cannot forget how they behaved at mr eager’s lecture at santa croce .
beautiful as it is , it is the town .
such music is not for the piano , and her audience began to get restive , and cecil , sharing the discontent , called out :
“ why so ?
l .
“ the old trouble ;
why will men have theories about women ?
how vexatious .
as you say it is all too horrible , and it is no good talking .
never again did she expose herself without due consideration and precaution against rebuff .
mr beebe , who felt responsible for her in the absence of miss bartlett , ventured to say :
so it has been the whole of this afternoon .
the others are going down the garden .
” he appealed to lucy .
she loved cecil ;
“ how do you like this view of ours , mr emerson ?
.
“ a good fellow , lavish , but i wish she’d start a pipe .
“ i think he was meaning to be kind .
why , it’s mr beebe !
i fell into all those violets , and he was silly and surprised .
there he found a mournful company .
there is something sacred in it .
“ we cast a shadow on something wherever we stand , and it is no good moving from place to place to save things ;
“ please !
he stared at her , and felt again that she had failed to be leonardesque .
italy was coming at last .
“ dearest lucy , how will you ever forgive me ?
nor did it seem applicable to a young man who had spent a quiet winter in rome with his mother .
the palace itself grew dim , swayed above her , fell on to her softly , slowly , noiselessly , and the sky fell with it .
“ oh , so he has a wife .
a hollow like a great amphitheatre , full of terraced steps and misty olives , now lay between them and the heights of fiesole , and the road , still following its curve , was about to sweep on to a promontory which stood out in the plain .
of course , this is the barest outline .
you must stop !
“ nothing ever happens to me , ” she reflected , as she entered the piazza signoria and looked nonchalantly at its marvels , now fairly familiar to her .
quinine could now be obtained in tabloids ;
i know .
he may be killed .
but any message given by you to me will be given by me to him as soon as he comes out .
“ take an old man’s word ;
as the pace increased to a gallop the large , slumbering form of mr emerson was thrown against the chaplain with the regularity of a machine .
i , even i , have won a great victory for the comic muse .
cuthbert eager .
“ oh he did ?
no it is just the same thing everywhere .
the too vast orb of her fate had crushed her ;
“ isn’t it wonderful ?
“ victory at last !
his arm swept three-fourths of the horizon .
their noses were as red as their baedekers , so cold was santa croce .
the sight of us haunted her or she couldn’t have described us as she did to her friend .
“ it matters supremely .
the emersons returned to hold laborious converse with the drivers ;
“ we were chatting to miss lavish .
“ i know , ” said cecil .
“ am i not always right ?
sir harry otway who need not be described came to the carriage and said “ mrs honeychurch , i meant to .
“ yes but it’s no good agreeing .
mrs butterworth had wanted to see him , and he did not want to be seen .
“ we shall have to sit three a side , because the trees drop , and yet it isn’t raining .
thank you very much for your gentleness .
they gain knowledge slowly , and perhaps too late .
i haven’t been to greece myself , and don’t mean to go , and i can’t imagine any of my friends going .
“ no one will help me .
this desire to govern a woman it lies very deep , and men and women must fight it together before they shall enter the garden .
“ then certainly i won’t play , ” said cecil , while miss bartlett , under the impression that she was snubbing george , added :
the one mr eager was so unkind to .
but she had never imagined one who would be happy and greet her with the shout of the morning star .
“ an old lady , so very vulgar , and almost bedridden .
he had suddenly extended his book before miss bartlett and mr eager , binding their hands together by a long glossy ribbon of churches , pictures , and views .
at the same moment the ground gave way , and with a cry she fell out of the wood .
i am very much upset about it .
wetting his hair first a sure sign of apathy he followed freddy into the divine , as indifferent as if he were a statue and the pond a pail of soapsuds .
tea , tea , tea , ” said mr beebe , and bustled his guests out of the front-door .
“ come away from the window , dear , ” said miss bartlett .
i differ from him on almost every point of any importance , and so , i expect i may say i hope you will differ .
“ how dare you be serious at windy corner ?
“ how are my protégés ?
“ freddy i do call the way you talk unkind .
how could she find her way home ?
charlotte , unselfish in the forum , would have tried a sweeter temper than lucy’s , and once , in the baths of caracalla , they had doubted whether they could continue their tour .
paper soap was a great help towards freshening up one’s face in the train .
“ you know our cousin , miss bartlett , ” said mrs honeychurch pleasantly .
“ miss honeychurch listening !
i had my own poor ideas of what a lady ought to do , but i hope i did not inflict them on you more than was necessary .
she loved going to concerts , she loved stopping with her cousin , she loved iced coffee and meringues .
miss lavish for that was the clever lady’s name turned to the right along the sunny lung’ arno .
he must write her a long account .
” said miss bartlett , as soon as he had disappeared .
” her mother flashed .
“ oh , bother charlotte , ” she said thoughtfully .
they did it again and again .
he had known summer street for so many years that he could not imagine it being spoilt .
“ oh , no .
at the notice of the english church (rev .
i cannot believe it is a coincidence .
“ what , cecil ?
“ don’t interrupt so foolishly .
i hoped you would have him all the evening , as well as all dinner-time .
“ go , mr eager , ” said miss bartlett , “ don’t ask our driver ;
miss bartlett was unequal to the bath .
truth counts , truth does count .
the truth must be told ;
” cecil suggested .
“ my goodness gracious me , child !
if you’d gone on about her , as you did about them , he might have broken down .
” for he had read his ruskin .
cecil laid his hand over his eyes .
” cried lucy .
“ let me give you a useful tip , emerson :
“ it isn’t true .
“ so you were here alone , miss honeychurch ?
mr beebe and freddy splashed each other .
even as she caught sight of him he grew dim ;
they have loved one another all along .
“ he will not come back , ” said george .
“ it is so hard to be absolutely truthful .
it was that they were different .
he has the merit if it is one of saying exactly what he means .
“ what photographs ?
they descended from the carriages ;
mr beebe knows them , too .
the honeychurches were a worthy family , but he began to realize that lucy was of another clay ;
“ not at all , ” he answered ;
they passed into the sunlight .
the air became brighter ;
it was the great joy that they had expected , and countless little joys of which they had never dreamt .
but why need she go as far as greece ?
i shall die emerson you beast , you’ve got on my bags .
she could not complete it , and looked out absently upon italy in the wet .
marry my boy .
there was a general sense of groping and bewilderment .
why could not miss honeychurch repose in the bosom of her family ?
that evening and all that night the water ran away .
the miscreant , a bony young man scorched black by the sun , rose to greet her with the courtesy of a host and the assurance of a relative .
george comes down to-morrow , and takes me up to his london rooms .
“ charlotte , dear charlotte , kiss me .
“ the first fine afternoon drive up to fiesole , and round by settignano , or something of that sort .
“ no , no .
“ protégés !
i had no idea you were intimate with her , or i should never have talked in this flippant , superficial way .
he was glad that she only played the first movement , for he could have paid no attention to the winding intricacies of the measures of nine-sixteen .
what i mind is that he’ll tell lucy .
it would have made things easier for her .
for a young man his face was rugged , and until the shadows fell upon it hard .
how it was built by faith in the full fervour of medievalism , before any taint of the renaissance had appeared .
“ i have no wish to discuss italy or any subject connected with your son .
as the motorcars passed through summer street they raised only a little dust , and their stench was soon dispersed by the wind and replaced by the scent of the wet birches or of the pines .
she described the miss alans’ character :
her paths were already weedy ;
i cannot blame my boy , and yet i wish he had told me first .
“ miss honeychurch !
“ you said oh , don’t go in for accuracy at this house .
“ ah , not for me , ” said the chaplain blandly , “ for i have been watching you and miss honeychurch for quite a little time .
“ perhaps i shall meet someone who reads me through and through !
the latter impulse seemed the more fruitful .
“ it is the kind of thing that only a gentleman can settle .
mr beebe , sitting unnoticed in the window , pondered this illogical element in miss honeychurch , and recalled the occasion at tunbridge wells when he had discovered it .
but lucy seems very uncertain , and in these days young people must decide for themselves .’ i said that because i didn’t want mrs vyse to think us old-fashioned .
he was in suspense all through the introduction , for not until the pace quickens does one know what the performer intends .
so now he had asked her once more , and , clear and gentle as ever , she had accepted him , giving no coy reasons for her delay , but simply saying that she loved him and would do her best to make him happy .
“ i do not feel myself an ordinary visitor , ” said miss bartlett , and looked at her frayed glove .
he saw that the local society was narrow , but , instead of saying , “ does that very much matter ?
the son acknowledged it , not by another bow , but by raising his eyebrows and smiling ;
“ my sermon ?
“ nonsense !
she got out to call for miss bartlett .
one woman , when i wrote a tactful letter , you know asking her to explain her social position to me , replied that she would pay the rent in advance .
then freddy said :
hullo !
she can hardly bear to speak of it .
his voice was rather parochial , but he did not quite see his way to answering naturally .
“ apooshoo , apooshoo , apooshoo , ” went freddy , swimming for two strokes in either direction , and then becoming involved in reeds or mud .
i have no time for the tenderness , and the comradeship , and the poetry , and the things that really matter , and for which you marry .
george emerson is still down the garden there , and is he to be left unpunished , or isn’t he ?
perhaps i have already said too much .
so possibly you know .
“ not very dutiful , ” said her mother’s voice .
“ oh , mr emerson ” she took hold of his hand “ you mustn’t .
that place is too sweetly squalid for words .
“ mr emerson has had to go .
“ it is our last chance .
“ well , i did try to sift the thing .
the storm had struck the overhead wire of the tramline , and one of the great supports had fallen .
it does not count that i helped you with the stair-eyes yesterday .
it was always touch and go .
signora bertolini is so english .
eggs , boilers , hydrangeas , maids of such were their lives compact .
“ how do you do , mr beebe ?
i wish , though , that cecil had not turned so cynical about women .
i don’t know what i should do without you .
” she sounded annoyed .
he read :
“ since cecil came back from london , nothing appears to please him .
“ dear marian , i am very sorry , but i have no small change nothing but sovereigns and half crowns .
the girl heard her as she entered the room , and was seized with one of those emotional impulses to which she could never attribute a cause .
” he indicated the spot where a kiss would be welcome .
occasionally he could be quite crude .
“ and you will be satisfied , too , for they’re friends of cecil ;
“ and the murderer tried to kiss him , you say how very odd italians are !
when you arrived we were in for a peculiarly mauvais quart d’heure .
by an odd chance unless we believe in a presiding genius of places the statues that relieve its severity suggest , not the innocence of childhood , nor the glorious bewilderment of youth , but the conscious achievements of maturity .
he put down his glass and opened the window .
he wrote a line so i heard yesterday which runs like this :
they had been stopped at the dazio coming back , and the young officials there , who seemed impudent and désœuvré , had tried to search their reticules for provisions .
i can hardly believe that all kinds of other things are just outside .
“ don’t trust me , miss honeychurch .
“ never .
“ i see .
“ i i’ll come up to tennis if i can manage it , ” and went into the house .
mr beebe disclaimed placing the garden of eden anywhere .
” “ dearest lucia , may i trespass upon you for a pin ?
i didn’t realize at the time and of course i want to see constantinople so particularly .
mr beebe sat back complacently , and miss alan began as follows :
cecil glanced at them as he proceeded to his toilet and they impeded mary with her brood of hot-water cans .
that last fact was undeniable .
he regarded himself as dressed .
“ why ever did she listen to it ?
sir harry hinted that a column , if possible , should be structural as well as decorative .
the elder ladies exchanged glances , not of disapproval ;
i am only asked for appearances .
i foresaw at florence that her quiet , uneventful childhood must end , and it has ended .
we are what matters .
you must see that it would be too absurd .
they surrounded the visitors on every side ;
and i have tried the note of interrogation first .
you have parted two people who were happy .
george and i both know this , but why does it distress him ?
i trust that you have realized about the ten days’ interval .
i must know my own mind and where i want to go .
” said freddy , as if taking orders .
“ i mean she has pretended to you that she did not love george .
“ then , if you’re so selfish , mr floyd must share a room with freddy .
i’m certain that’s the old man’s doing .
“ i met them on the hill .
” then he said more gently :
in january he would rescue his leonardo from this stupefying twaddle .
“ emerson was the name , not harris .
“ i made a slip .
they reached the upper lawn alone .
” called voices from the carriage .
they escaped , and lucy said with relief :
“ in the umbrian room .
the church was invisible , but up in the darkness to the left there was a hint of colour .
she missed cecil’s epigram , but grasped the feeling that prompted it .
the honours of the day rested with mr beebe .
“ i am so sorry , mrs vyse it is these dreams .
when she talked to george they met again almost immediately at the rectory his voice moved her deeply , and she wished to remain near him .
it’s absurd .
“ i had got an idea i dare say wrongly that you feel more at home with me in a room .
“ all right .
something in her voice made miss bartlett repeat her question , intoning it more vigorously .
“ thank you very much , but i could not think of that .
and then , as miss bartlett and minnie were lingering behind with mr beebe , she turned the conversation to a less disturbing topic , and asked him how he liked his new house .
“ i saw him in florence , ” said lucy , hoping that this would pass for a reply .
lucy clung to miss bartlett and miss lavish ;
a word from cecil would soothe her , she was sure .
that’s all right .
how much better to run about in comfortable clothes than to sit at the piano and feel girt under the arms .
but you oughtn’t to tease one so .
don’t be angry !
“ they are on a hillside , and florence is in the distance .
“ we sat opposite them at dinner last night .
to her mr eager objected , saying that here was the thin edge of the wedge , and one must guard against imposition .
why throw up the sponge ?
miss bartlett was full of very natural curiosity .
lucy cried aloud :
“ my dear cecil , look here .
“ but you do remember it ?
o .
“ what an odd place to meet people !
i heard from them last week miss teresa and miss catharine alan .
mr beebe picked it up , and said :
the three gentlemen rotated in the pool breast high , after the fashion of the nymphs in götterdämmerung .
“ war not with the may’ would render a correct meaning .
“ are not beauty and delicacy the same ?
her eyes are bent to the weald .
in the midst of her satisfaction she continued to sidle , and at last the cause was disclosed .
such a one was miss lavish , and such for the moment was charlotte .
and the people who had not meant to help the miss lavishes , the cecils , the miss bartletts !
” mrs honeychurch exclaimed .
i don’t like charlotte .
“ she did see my father , surely .
“ yes ?
away from it , in the solitude of their rooms , mr beebe , and even freddy , might again be critical .
“ scusi tanto , signora , ” he replied in tones as gentle and whipped up his horse .
“ then let us come home .
“ nothing about the past .
the food was poor , but the talk had a witty weariness that impressed the girl .
what exactly it was miss bartlett did not stop to consider , for her glance passed on to his clothes .
she didn’t know that i knew you at tunbridge wells ;
there were letters for her at the bureau one from her brother , full of athletics and biology ;
“ alan wasn’t the name of the people sir harry’s let to .
and above all rose the voice of the clever lady , crying :
“ so i saw .
“ he was not baptized , ” said the old man .
was it likely that a clergyman and a gentleman would refer to his engagement in a manner so flippant ?
“ remember , lucy , i alone am implicated in this .
“ i can’t have it , mr emerson .
“ perhaps i spoke hastily .
“ in these days of toil and tumult one has great needs of the country and its message of purity .
“ miss lavish is so original , ” murmured lucy .
the meeting at the rectory had passed off well enough .
“ yours affectionately , “ l .
“ it is so wonderful what they say about his tactile values .
is he nice ?
cecil , too , became demonstrative .
i must have dropped them out there in the square .
and though she had been to italy , it had lost none of its charm .
“ it’s a special collection i forget what for .
that’s settled .
but his is a type one disagrees with rather than deplores .
he has improved ;
the elder lady smiled and kissed her , saying very distinctly :
it was really a ruse of lucy’s to justify her despondency a ruse of which she was not herself conscious , for she was marching in the armies of darkness .
george served , and surprised her by his anxiety to win .
“ i’m not cynical .
and runs down to his father for week-ends .
miss bartlett and minnie are coming with me to tea at the beehive .
nothing untoward occurred until the pudding .
the rain was streaming down the black windows , and the great room felt damp and chilly .
the men on the river were fishing .
“ i must have been selfish or unkind ;
george made her nervous ;
he could not know that this was the most intimate conversation they had ever had .
she kept it without hypocrisy in the morning , and broke it without reluctance in the afternoon .
can you ?
but soon the conflagration died down , and the ghosts began to gather in the darkness .
oh , she had someone else in her mind ;
she knelt down by her cousin’s side and took her in her arms .
she was reduced to saying :
she had been in his arms , and he remembered it , just as he remembered the blood on the photographs that she had bought in alinari’s shop .
how funny !
” cried freddy .
“ it is i who am sorry , ” said miss lavish .
“ but why at all ?
oddly enough , the group was beautiful .
to george , to cecil , she would have lied again ;
she had refused , not because she disliked him , but because she did not know what had happened , and suspected that he did know .
“ it’s impossible , ” repeated lucy .
why , how nice !
to shield me is an insult .
he’s well connected i’ll say it again if you like :
no , it’s not fair .
” said the maid , and the new rector of summer street was shown in ;
i do beg , no vulgar clinking in the plate with halfpennies ;
“ what’s that ?
“ there’s an absurd account of a view in this book , ” said cecil .
she had counselled the step ;
naturally , of course , i should have given it to you ;
at the moment when she was about to judge him her cousin’s voice had intervened , and , ever since , it was miss bartlett who had dominated ;
“ well , you know what i mean .
and continually did she rise from her seat and part the curtains so that a rivulet of light fell across the carpet , and make the remark that they were still there .
“ only thirty acres just the garden , all downhill , and some fields .
“ the signorino will walk .
there was no question of tragedy .
“ is it true , ” continued lucy in awe-struck tone , “ that miss lavish is writing a book ?
i wanted her to spend six months with me at tunbridge wells , and she refused .
an interval elapses .
now she entered the church depressed and humiliated , not even able to remember whether it was built by the franciscans or the dominicans .
“ oh , goodness !
there is much that is immortal in this medieval lady .
“ oh , my photographs !
conversation had become agreeable to them , and they were pacing up and down the terrace .
throughout the squalor of her homeward drive she spoke at once his salutation remained .
” then the boy verged into a man .
he really won’t be any nuisance , charlotte .
as she left them her mother’s shout of “ harris !
they could not lag behind that smile of hers which she gave them ere she kicked the drawing-room door .
he is jolting us now .
you don’t like freddy , nor my mother .
“ come , let us go back now , and settle the whole thing up .
“ no , i have said nothing indiscreet .
ha !
but at that moment miss lavish and her local-colour box moved also , and disappeared down a side street , both gesticulating largely .
“ charlotte dear , what do you mean ?
the steel knives , the only articles which might attract the current , are in the other carriage .
summer was ending , and the evening brought her odours of decay , the more pathetic because they were reminiscent of spring .
” he cried , shouting in at the open door , through which much squalor was visible .
he doesn’t always look as if he’s going to burst into tears .
but her body behaved so ridiculously that she stopped .
his mysterious persecution of mr eager became relentless ;
“ most certainly i have .
” she retorted .
he knows that i am a resident perfectly well , and yet he goes on worrying me to buy his vulgar views .
“ it does indeed !
“ cecil has a very high standard for people , ” faltered lucy , seeing trouble ahead .
“ in half an hour or so your rooms will be ready , ” said mr beebe .
it wriggleth in my tummy .
“ yes really in a better way .
but this evening you are a different person :
ah , this wind !
she took to it , practically in despair , after her life’s work was carried away in a landslip .
“ well ?
“ i am not bad .
there a cabman signalled to them ;
“ you only asked for it just in time , ” the lady retorted .
their pleasantry and their piety show cracks , their wit becomes cynicism , their unselfishness hypocrisy ;
i think nothing’s funnier than to hear silly things read out loud .
but unfortunately i have met the type before .
“ mother , do come away , ” said lucy .
he frowned ;
at all events , they were not his own .
what’s wanted is a man with a whip .
that she fought us on the surface , and yet she hoped .
standing between mr beebe and cecil , she had made a few temperate allusions to italy , and george had replied .
“ they’re angry with miss honeychurch because she was late for breakfast , ” whispered minnie , “ and floyd has gone , and mr vyse has gone , and freddy won’t play with me .
there is mr eager , but you do not trust him .
the child’s legs had become as melting wax .
miss bartlett who , even now , could be heard sighing into a crack in the partition wall ;
” she took out her purse .
and when she rose to go , she turned back and gave the two outsiders a nervous little bow .
no , i don’t suppose it will prove to be them .
freddy nodded .
that your cousin has always hoped .
possibly he does know , for i refer to lorenzo the poet .
buon giorno !
“ what line is he taking up ?
she gave such a business-like lift to her veil .
” exclaimed the girl , as soon as he had departed .
youth enwrapped them ;
this was a stock remark , the supreme achievement of the pension bertolini in the way of definition .
it did not do to think , nor , for the matter of that , to feel .
they tried to remember the last name of lady louisa someone , who had taken a house near summer street the other year , but she had not liked it , which was odd of her .
it’s nothing to do with sitting here at all .
of course , i didn’t mean that i played well ;
“ no church for me , thank you .
its very vagueness spurred him into knight-errantry .
some critics believe that her garden was the scene of the decameron , which lends it an additional interest , does it not ?
an italian’s ignorance is sometimes more remarkable than his knowledge .
it was a shock to the girl to find how far emotion had ebbed in others .
dear mrs vyse .
he could still remember his depression that afternoon at rome , when she and her terrible cousin fell on him out of the blue , and demanded to be taken to st .
” said mr emerson to lucy .
“ i didn’t mean the egg was well boiled , ” corrected freddy , “ because in point of fact she forgot to take it off , and as a matter of fact i don’t care for eggs .
“ hi !
lucy could ring for the maid if she liked but mrs vyse thought it kind to go herself .
tea at a renaissance villa ?
“ what about music ?
” cried mrs honeychurch , suddenly alert .
are we seriously to suppose that all these clouds , all this immense electrical display , is simply called into existence to extinguish you or me ?
she simply ran away , and after waiting quite a time , i had to come in by myself .
“ i could hear your beautiful playing , miss honeychurch , though i was in my room with the door shut .
i gathered that he disliked the engagement , and felt it might separate him from you .
oh , no !
“ rather a strenuous clerk it would be , ” said lucy .
it was hard on lucy .
no , you can only see it if you stand no , do not stand ;
so did cecil ;
she “ never exactly understood , ” she would say in after years , “ how he managed to strengthen her .
do you know , mother , i shall have our children educated just like lucy .
i called .
“ i know , ” said lucy , wincing at the word .
the poor thing was very ill after it , and so got tempted into cigarettes .
hi !
as for charlotte as for charlotte she was exactly the same .
“ do not blame her , please , mr eager .
so they re-entered the city with hands clasped .
was this really italy ?
i had silly thoughts .
“ i was saying , if our poor little cockney lives must have a background , let it be italian .
i don’t understand you , ” said cecil .
here is your money all shillings , except two half-crowns .
no , he is not tactful ;
” she exclaimed , “ i have an idea .
she did not .
i said :
“ tunbridge wells , “ september .
here freddy’s friend , mr floyd , made the one remark of his that need be quoted :
“ i will inflict joseph emery prank on you no longer .
john .
“ i don’t understand this sort of thing .
“ oh , must you ?
that day in santa croce did they say anything against me ?
“ goal !
meanwhile the name of the new tenants had diverted mrs honeychurch from the contemplation of her own abilities .
” and this too had lent anxiety to her eyes when she saluted the dear view and the dear garden in the foreground , and above them , scarcely conceivable elsewhere , the dear sun .
the weather was cool , and it did her no harm .
there are all kinds of things in it that we have never noticed .
your soul , dear lucy !
he showed her his cigar .
she felt like a child in school who had answered a question rightly .
there was revealed a terrace , such as is owned by many villas with trees each side of it , and on it a little rustic seat , and two flower-beds .
here comes the horse ” it was always the horse , never the carriage .
“ what’s wrong with the court ?
what do you think ?
“ i’m not going to worry you .
he chanced to be in a lucid critical mood , and would not sympathize with exaltation .
it was long ere they returned to miss bartlett , but when they did her behaviour seemed more interesting .
yours is a glorious country .
at the end of five minutes she returned unobtrusively with a green baize board , and began playing patience .
could anything be more majestic , more pathetic , beautiful , true ?
the clergyman , inwardly cursing the female sex , bowed , and departed with her message .
“ i was coming to show you this delightful letter from those friends of miss honeychurch .
“ then why not say so at once , instead of considering half an hour ?
and as it is , the glass over our front door was broken last election , and freddy is sure it was the tories ;
“ cecil said one day and i thought it so profound that there are two kinds of cads the conscious and the subconscious .
i left her unchaperoned .
“ pfui !
“ greece is not for our little lot ” ;
somewhat mollified , he sat down again .
they were so serious and so strange that she could not remember how to behave .
a woman’s place !
it could be nothing to her that a man had kissed her on a mountain once .
mr beebe did not quite understand .
mr beebe saw it , and continued to divert the conversation .
cecil wondered why lucy had been amused .
“ what a helpful answer !
“ what if i do ?
i don’t believe in this world sorrow .
i should practically be robbing the one who lost .
the signora had no business to do it at all .
for the sake of something to do , he began to read her the letter .
“ that last remark struck me as so particularly true .
but not until we are comrades shall we enter the garden .
the horses were stopped , the lovers were ordered to disentangle themselves , the boy was to lose his pourboire , the girl was immediately to get down .
“ cissie ” was the name of one of these villas , “ albert ” of the other .
that book’s all warped .
hardly had she announced this fell decision when she reversed it .
” asked the son and heir .
the sacred lake would never be the same again , and , on sunday week , something would even happen to windy corner .
dearest , had we better ?
“ signorina !
i want to know .
no one would take him for a clergyman .
it was not exactly that a man had died ;
at breakfast next morning she took decisive action .
she “ conquered her breakdown .
he said :
you know why he is down here , and yet you deliberately insult him , and try to turn him out of my house .
if they were hypocrites they did not know it , and their hypocrisy had every chance of setting and of becoming true .
why ?
i put it down to too much beethoven .
what possible objection had she ?
then she lost her balance .
this attempt to divert the conversation was too puerile , and mrs honeychurch resented it .
nature had intended her to be poor and to live in such a house .
the drawing-room curtains at windy corner had been pulled to meet , for the carpet was new and deserved protection from the august sun .
really , mr vyse had the art of placing one in the most tiresome positions .
then looking rather thoughtfully at the two cousins , he retired to his own rooms , to write up his philosophic diary .
but his eye wavered when mrs honeychurch exclaimed :
i am caught up every way .
lucy turned her back , and began to look at mr beebe’s books .
“ at present ?
she was no theologian , but she felt that here was a very foolish old man , as well as a very irreligious one .
his face was drooping and swollen , but his eyes , though they were sunken deep , gleamed with a child’s courage .
it was my mistake .
mrs honeychurch refused .
” asked the chaplain paternally .
he should know no one intimately , least of all a woman .
she had played at losing freddy in it , when freddy was a purple-faced baby ;
“ i i see what you mean , and certainly cecil oughtn’t to .
“ oh , no , she didn’t see him .
it is altogether too big for our little lot .
mr eager , who sat with his back to the horses , saw nothing of the indecorous proceeding , and continued his conversation with lucy .
“ what’s wrong with the boy ?
and he got in .
do you , in the first place , mind her breaking with vyse ?
i cannot begin making a fuss at this stage .
“ oh , poor mr beebe !
i am very sorry about it all , and should not feel easy unless i warned you .
papa was to do with journalism , but is rheumatic and has retired .
he talked about italy , like any other person .
george would seem to have behaved like a cad throughout ;
“ then i had better speak to him and remind him who i am .
“ suppose we don’t talk about this silly italian business any more .
yesterday had been a muddle queer and odd , the kind of thing one could not write down easily on paper but she had a feeling that charlotte and her shopping were preferable to george emerson and the summit of the torre del gallo .
do you know what he did ?
” into his own eyes tears came .
and now lucy wants to go to greece .
she was correct as usual .
” he laughed .
“ go , please .
but now i am not one little bit .
“ none .
the italians are a most unpleasant people .
cecil closed the novel with a bang .
i might even share a flat for a little with some other girl .
he would tolerate the father and draw out the son , who was silent .
“ because they’re all alike .
mrs honeychurch , amusing and portly , promised well as a mother-in-law .
but i saw him first in the national gallery , when he winced because my father mispronounced the names of great painters .
“ how are you going to stop him talking about it ?
“ no , he isn’t well .
attribute nothing to fate .
and what are five miles from a station in these days of bicycles ?
“ non fate guerra al maggio , ” he murmured .
you call it scoring off sir harry , but do you realize that it is all at my expense ?
that of protector and protected .
he wondered whether he would not plan a pleasant day for these folk before they left some expedition , perhaps , with lucy well chaperoned to be nice to them .
“ tell me , where do they place the scene of that wonderful seventh day ?
why it’s miss lavish !
then mr beebe consented to run a memorable sight .
“ you cannot live with vyse .
“ i can’t remember all charlotte’s worries , ” said lucy bitterly .
“ i i had to .
and look at mr beebe housing me came over this morning and heard i was going !
he had had full warning of mr flack’s intentions , and might have bought the plot before building commenced :
chapter two was found , and she glanced at its opening sentences .
“ that’s all right .
his thoughts , like his behaviour , would not be modified by awe .
“ lucy , what’s emerson like ?
any one can find places , but the finding of people is a gift from god .
that’s why i break off my engagement .
there are some working men whom one would be very willing to see out here in florence little as they would make of it .
charlotte would burnish up past foolishness , and this might upset her nerves .
serious as the choice had been , lucy did not repent .
for the real event whatever it was had taken place , not in the loggia , but by the river .
they alone of this little company will double malea and plough the waters of the saronic gulf .
“ of course , you may , cecil .
it’s pouring again .
“ one of our pension acquaintances kindly brought her home , ” said miss bartlett , adroitly concealing the sex of the preserver .
picture number two :
” called mr beebe .
what advantage would he get from being a cad , to put it bluntly ?
he will be hours , ” said mr beebe .
“ you ought to find a tenant at once , ” he said maliciously .
in the morning they left for rome .
mr beebe exclaimed :
” sighed miss bartlett , fingering a model of the leaning tower of pisa .
“ ignore him , ” said mr eager sharply , and they all walked rapidly away from the square .
he had shown her the holiness of direct desire .
between the two sections of his flock he was often the only link , and it was his avowed custom to select those of his migratory sheep who seemed worthy , and give them a few hours in the pastures of the permanent .
cecil nodded intelligently .
anyhow , she left it almost finished in the grotto of the calvary at the capuccini hotel at amalfi while she went for a little ink .
“ miss bartlett , miss bartlett , miss bartlett , ” moaned cecil , again laying his hand over his eyes .
i do not consider her choice of a piece happy .
“ you should have heard us talking about you , dear .
” a reader in lucy’s place would not find it obvious .
” said lucy , though in her heart she sympathized ;
that doesn’t matter a bit .
mr eager had met them with a questioning eye .
but this did not do , either .
to his relief , george began to talk .
“ mother , charlotte , cecil , freddy , you , ” said lucy , playing a note for each person who knew , and then playing a sixth note .
his hand was still extended .
a mechanic of some sort himself when he was young ;
“ not a bit , ” said lucy , with trembling lips .
“ take care my hat !
” she had “ forgiven ” george , as she put it , and she made a point of being pleasant to him .
“ not while mr emerson is here to entertain us .
i only meant that there was a force in you that i hadn’t known of up till now .
we will simply drift .
it’s miss lavish’s novel , and she’s publishing it under somebody else’s name .
he was driven to use the prerogatives of his profession .
now , the english colony at florence , miss honeychurch and it is of considerable size , though , of course , not all equally a few are here for trade , for example .
phaethon at once slipped the left rein over her head , thus enabling himself to drive with his arm round her waist .
mr beebe , who could be silent , but who could not bear silence , was compelled to chatter , since the expedition looked like a failure , and neither of his companions would utter a word .
the light was behind you , and it was in my eyes .
but it had begotten a spectral family mr harris , miss bartlett’s letter , mr beebe’s memories of violets and one or other of these was bound to haunt her before cecil’s very eyes .
“ i know , ” said miss bartlett civilly .
the clergyman , who had the air of one on a holiday , did not remember the ladies quite as clearly as they remembered him .
i shall never say it again .
“ then i want to ask the emersons up to sunday tennis .
the two elder ladies soon threw off the mask .
they were gone some time , and cecil was left with the dowagers .
is it worth while rushing off to greece ?
“ perhaps you would like to stay away from your home altogether ?
“ news ?
do you suppose there’s any difference between spring in nature and spring in man ?
she did not mind .
“ charlotte , ” she murmured .
lucy does not stand for the medieval lady , who was rather an ideal to which she was bidden to lift her eyes when feeling serious .
“ no wonder the novel’s bad , ” she added .
he gazed indignantly at the girl , who met him with equal indignation .
the sitting-room itself was blocked with books .
they always perched there before crossing the great seas , and for a week or two would fidget gently over clothes , guide-books , mackintosh squares , digestive bread , and other continental necessaries .
he only stopped once , to pick her some great blue violets .
satisfactory ;
she repeated :
life , so far as she troubled to conceive it , was a circle of rich , pleasant people , with identical interests and identical foes .
“ as his mother did .
but this time i’m not to blame ;
mr beebe had his doubts , but they would have been put down to clerical narrowness .
he must be jealous , or he would not dislike a man for such foolish reasons .
oh , i forgot ;
sir harry , pull those things down at once !
something had enfeebled her , and the case for cecil , which she had mastered so perfectly in london , would not come forth in an effective form .
for cecil considered the bone and the maples’ furniture separately ;
come , mr emerson , sit down after all your energy .
and then you say , tell’ .
and then to prepare yourself , find two doddering old ladies , and go abroad with them .
” he asked , pinning her with his elbows , and advancing his face to hers .
oh , do keep quiet , though , and let a man do some work .
it made a curious little scene , this attempt of the cockney to convey the grace and geniality of the south .
“ so one would have thought , ” said the other helplessly .
“ the crush when charlotte gets in will be abominable , ” she remarked .
lucy interrupted .
“ mr beebe , look at that , ” said freddy in awestruck tones .
“ i want more independence , ” said lucy lamely ;
they reached the beehive tavern at about five o’clock .
“ i haven’t had a really good education , for one thing , ” she continued , still on her knees by the sideboard .
mrs honeychurch started and smiled .
“ women like looking at a view ;
mr beebe had regained good humour , and mr eager was already snubbing miss lavish .
it might have been most unpleasant .
miss bartlett was unconvinced by the safety of contessa baroncelli’s daughters .
“ summer street will never be the same again .
every one takes them for english , you see , especially if their hair is strained tightly behind .
“ i have been thinking , miss bartlett , ” he said , “ and , unless you very much object , i would like to reopen that discussion .
i beg your pardon most humbly if my words suggested that there was .
i plead guilty to being such a chap , and will not inflict myself on you .
“ certainly not .
the clergyman , knowing this , looked at miss honeychurch with more than his usual kindness .
lest cecil should see her face she turned to george and saw his face .
a cup of coffee was upset over lucy’s figured silk , and though lucy feigned indifference , her mother feigned nothing of the sort but dragged her indoors to have the frock treated by a sympathetic maid .
“ how wonderfully people rise in these days !
when in motion his orb was encircled by a ring .
she did not acknowledge that her brain was warped , for the brain itself must assist in that acknowledgment , and she was disordering the very instruments of life .
“ what is to be done now ?
yet as he spoke the darkness was withdrawn , veil after veil , and she saw to the bottom of her soul .
i mightn’t have seen miss honeychurch rise , but i should certainly have heard miss bartlett fall .
here i am so comfortable with a fire .
therefore an invitation from the chaplain was something to be proud of .
“ yes , i suppose we ought to be going , ” was her reply .
“ why no’ ?
for a little directness to liberate the soul !
“ yes , so do i .
“ i trust not .
he seized her by the elbows and humorously danced her up and down the passage .
when he returned for it he heard , to his relief and surprise , the tinkling of a mozart sonata .
“ charlotte ?
“ you kind , anxious thing .
the question was ominous ;
one could play a new game with the view , and try to find in its innumerable folds some town or village that would do for florence .
i want to grow older quickly .
and he took the shoddy reproof and touched it into immortality .
the weather was breaking up , breaking , broken , and it is a sense of the fit rather than of the supernatural that equips such crises with the salvos of angelic artillery .
“ what can such people be made of ?
they hurried home through a world of black and grey .
“ cross it out , too , ” said freddy .
then perhaps he will come back .
” and as if he had done all else , he turned to miss bartlett , who sat like some portent against the skies of the evening .
“ cecil has told you to think so .
he could almost visualize the motor-vans of messrs .
his own content was absolute , but hers held bitterness :
cheap mosaic brooches , which the maids , next christmas , would never tell from real ;
i feared you would repent you of your choice .
” said his sister .
he said :
i have never felt anything of the sort .
but you ought to have stopped me .
of course she would accompany lucy everywhere .
mr beebe , indeed , noticing her startled eyes at dinner-time , had again passed to himself the remark of “ too much beethoven .
“ he is really i think he was taken by surprise , just as i was before .
you haven’t seen her lately , and don’t realize how tiresome she can be , though so good .
” george emerson was coming up the garden with a tennis ball in his hand .
lucy , from a cowardly wish to improve the situation , said :
“ so we shall be a partie carrée , ” said the chaplain .
lucy complained that the hood was stuffy .
what a fortunate thing !
i’m thoroughly happy , and having a splendid time .
i like that .
she gets on our nerves .
for the first time she felt the influence of spring .
those had been sincere and passionate , and had suggested beauty rather than short skirts and latch-keys .
“ but mother will understand .
since she could not unravel the tangle , she must take care not to re-enter it .
it can’t all be true .
and she was tragical only in the sense that she was great , for she loved to play on the side of victory .
something in its mute appeal made her reckless .
i may just mean that they frightened me .
the son nodded .
“ but i dare say i shall receive scant support .
“ now play us the other garden the one in parsifal .
“ she will find it difficult .
while she believed that her snub about the miss alans came from sir harry otway , she had borne it like a good girl .
he shrugged his shoulders .
it was thus that mr emerson had murdered his wife in the sight of god .
at the serious note in his voice she stepped frankly and kindly towards him .
silence .
” freddy snorted , and turned over two leaves .
the entire congregation , which consists of your cousin , your mother , and my mother , stands waiting in the church , till the carriage fetches it .
i will never speak of it either to her or to any one .
miss bartlett became plaintive .
“ the bother is this :
“ quite right , ” said the clergyman .
“ i do think mrs butterworth is rather tiresome , if you mean that .
it’s very naughty of me , but i would like to set an examination paper at dover , and turn back every tourist who couldn’t pass it .
“ is it this ?
the early victorians .’ just imagine !
you have not , of course , seen the disgraceful illustrations which the gutter press this man is a public nuisance ;
and together in divine confidence they would disentangle and interpret them all .
“ it is just the drive we had arranged with mr beebe without any fuss at all .
she arrived at the london and brighton station , and had to hire a cab up .
of course it was the railway !
she leant placidly back .
“ true , every word .
i read the book afterwards .
he jumped over the net and sat down at her feet asking :
they would clear out in half an hour .
she no longer read novels herself , devoting all her spare time to solid literature in the hope of catching cecil up .
“ look at that adorable wine-cart !
” asked lucy fearfully , expecting some harrowing tale .
the view was forming at last ;
“ if it is mrs grundy who is troubling you , i do assure you that you can neglect the good person .
“ you’re tired of windy corner .
she would abandon every topic to inveigh against those women who (instead of minding their houses and their children) seek notoriety by print .
but now cecil claimed her .
“ the lord knows .
i do detest conventional intercourse .
come and have a bathe’ ?
she exclaimed :
a one-horse carriage would do for us .
such romance as i have is that of the inglese italianato .
” cried mr emerson .
oh , yes !
no eloquence was his , nor did he suffer from the lack of it .
she heard her voice saying :
on the cornice of the wardrobe , the hand of an amateur had painted this inscription :
“ i i did .
“ nonsense !
miss alan , what do you think ?
this successful morning left no pleasant impressions on lucy .
he was poor he sheltered a family the tax on bread .
miss bartlett’s sudden transitions were too uncanny .
“ you can play well enough to make up a four .
miss alan was always thus being charitable against her better judgement .
i had to hear so much , and he minded telling me ;
it’s all too horrible .
now she was crouching in the corner trying to extract a circular note from a kind of linen nose-bag which hung in chaste concealment round her neck .
“ nonsense yourself !
“ he’s unhappy .
“ oh , bother the credit and who’s been right or wrong !
perhaps george emerson is right .
ah !
it is the fashionable world .
“ no , i haven’t , ” replied lucy , and then could have bitten her tongue for understanding so quickly what her cousin meant .
he climbed on to the box shivering , with his collar up , prophesying the swift approach of bad weather .
“ i never suggested that .
“ is he a friend of yours ?
you aren’t fit to go home alone .
“ eleanor , be quiet , ” plucking at her vivacious companion .
this terrace was the well-head , the primal source whence beauty gushed out to water the earth .
“ did you tell mr emerson about greece ?
” cried mr beebe .
“ so you must stop .
we might as well invite him .
“ i have no profession , ” said cecil .
oh , charlotte , we must stop now , however bad the rooms are .
how delightful it is !
this futile and unprofitable transaction filled the knight with sadness as he leant on mrs honeychurch’s carriage .
“ or does his work keep him in london ?
“ he comes out for his holiday to italy , and behaves like that ;
it was miss bartlett who returned now , and with appalling vividness .
“ is he the clever sort , or is he a decent chap ?
minnie could be heard arguing with miss bartlett through the floor .
in the drawing-room lucy was tinkling at a mozart sonata .
i don’t see why freddy , don’t poke me .
the young men , who had now appeared , mocked her with ungenerous words .
she had counted on his being petty .
” she could not control her mirth .
and all the time we were making conversation i was wondering what to do with them .
lucy passed into schumann .
cecil’s first movement was one of irritation .
she thought :
“ i don’t mean exactly that .
“ no good .
“ but why shouldn’t it be everywhere in no time ?
it was only that a few weeks ago .
she had seen his black head in the bushes ;
“ practically .
for our part we liked them , didn’t we ?
for they had entered mudie’s .
“ they walk through my italy like a pair of cows .
this solitude oppressed her ;
look at my scarlet pompoms , and the wind blowing your skirts about , and the ground so hard that not a prop will stick in , and then the carriage having to go out , when i had counted on having powell , who give everyone their due does tie up dahlias properly .
“ but you are .
“ miss honeychurch , you do sound tired .
there’s nothing to stop about for , either in the house or out of it .
she was too late .
“ even from the scientific standpoint the chances against our being struck are enormous .
she hopes to get someone else .’ it’s disgusting , brutal !
“ i vote you have a men’s four .
though the danger was greater , she was not shaken by deep sobs .
remembering that she was engaged to cecil , she compelled herself to confused remembrances of george ;
they tried to piece the thing together .
“ and do be sure you dry yourselves thoroughly first .
i used to think i could teach young people the whole of life , but i know better now , and all my teaching of george has come down to this :
how horrible to grow old in charlotte’s way !
over the river men were at work with spades and sieves on the sandy foreshore , and on the river was a boat , also diligently employed for some mysterious end .
“ i think so ;
“ and what a coincidence that you should meet mr vyse !
“ but you do , ” he went on , not waiting for contradiction .
he had made a gentle effort to introduce the emersons into bertolini society , and the effort had failed .
“ mr beebe , i’m thankful simply thankful .
it was more than her nerves could stand .
“ i never liked miss lavish .
give it to me ;
mr beebe sympathized with her very much .
ladies !
“ same stuff as parsons are made of .
she bought baedeker , and then continued :
“ how good everyone is !
and perhaps he did not put it very definitely he ought to introduce her into more congenial circles as soon as possible .
as her time at florence drew to its close she was only at ease amongst those to whom she felt indifferent .
this she might not attempt .
“ murder , if you want to know , ” he cried angrily .
it gave her no extra pleasure that any one should be left in the cold ;
my mother and my cousin have gone .
would you count it ?
he answered reverently :
the tramcar became entangled in their ranks , and moved on painfully , like a caterpillar in a swarm of ants .
“ water’s not so bad , ” said george , reappearing from his plunge , and sputtering at the sun .
she was determined to take lucy herself , her head not being so very bad .
leonora speeding across the square .
that spoils the four .
” her voice swelled .
“ you didn’t attend .
“ why , she rents a field of us !
cecil , who wore a bowler , must be going away , while freddy (a cap) was seeing him to the station .
” and two little old ladies , who were sitting further up the table , with shawls hanging over the backs of the chairs , looked back , clearly indicating “ we are not ;
but she felt that her attitude repelled him .
i fell to pieces the very first day we were engaged .
she saw him once again at rome , on the ceiling of the sistine chapel , carrying a burden of acorns .
“ but i must go somewhere !
they don’t .
mr beebe saw that lucy very properly did not wish to discuss her action , so after a sincere expression of sympathy , he said , “ i have had an absurd letter from miss alan .
you have gone too far to retreat .
” and , after a little thought , he negotiated the slope into windy corner , light of heart .
“ hullo , lucy !
“ perhaps they won’t want me down there .
cecil was absent one did not play bumble-puppy when he was there .
freddy’s got a friend coming tuesday , there’s cecil , and you’ve promised to take in minnie beebe because of the diphtheria scare .
was italy deflecting her from the path of prim chaperon , which he had assigned to her at tunbridge wells ?
now , miss honeychurch , go back keep warm .
you don’t assert yourself enough .
he knelt on the tiled floor , and laid his face in her lap .
she remembered how he had sighed among the tombs at santa croce because things wouldn’t fit ;
soon after his marriage the social atmosphere began to alter .
“ i don’t know .
mr beebe was bicycling over this monday afternoon with a piece of gossip .
our driver is no help .
you know all that has passed between them in rome ;
that was all .
freddy was at his wittiest , referring to cecil as the “ fiasco ” family honoured pun on fiance .
whichever way they looked , kind ladies smiled and shouted at them .
i must make him care to live , and down here he can’t .
the necessary roar ensued , and then they drove off .
fortunately , the men were hungry .
“ look out !
i am a little to blame .
go and support poor mr beebe , he is nearly demented .
“ mr beebe , aren’t you bathing ?
“ i never said so !
persephone , who spends half her life in the grave she could interpret it also .
what would you have me do ?
the tenants moved into cissie villa while she was safe in the london flat .
i must say i forgot myself and laughed ;
“ all right , cecil , that will do .
only when she heard that mr beebe was also coming did her thanks become more sincere .
“ news ?
on the summit they paused .
george emerson is coming up this afternoon .
“ couldn’t you have escaped to tennis ?
novels about italy ;
“ so you did tell ?
“ abominable’ is much too strong .
they have given us their rooms .
she had been thus all her life , but really , on this italian tour , she was surpassing herself .
” now cecil had explained psychology to her one wet afternoon , and all the troubles of youth in an unknown world could be dismissed .
“ oh , come along cecil .
i must go to greece because i do not love george ;
in london he would keep his place .
mr emerson was an old man , and surely a girl might humour him .
“ i think everyone at windy corner will approve ;
he glanced at the curtains dismally .
oh , dear , what should she do ?
she only felt , “ i do not love george ;
he prefers it vague said the old man had practically’ murdered his wife had murdered her in the sight of god .
miss lucy !
but remember the mountains over florence and the view .
” she fell sobbing into the chair .
perhaps gentlemen are different to what they were when i was young .
” cried his mother .
after a moment , he contemplated her flushed face and excited gestures with a certain approval .
there will be a deal of local colouring , descriptions of florence and the neighbourhood , and i shall also introduce some humorous characters .
“ yes , indeed , and at the present moment homeless .
the carriage swept with agonizing jolts up through the piazza of fiesole and into the settignano road .
that’s worth minding .
who’s been taking a book out of the shelf and leaving it about to spoil ?
“ he has not told his father to whom he tells all things .
ho , mr beebe , if you knew what i suffer over the children’s edjucaishion .
” he contented himself with saying :
“ there i cannot agree with you .
“ well , i acted the truth the only thing i did do and you came back to me .
but how can we return to nature when we have never been with her ?
i am sorry , and ought to have refused you this last time , too .
charlotte made me , for some reason .
nothing more .
mr george emerson happened to be a few paces away , looking at her across the spot where the man had been .
she moved her elbows before saying :
but now i am well .
i’ll get euphemia to change it , and we’ll start the whole thing again from the beginning .
“ whatever happened ?
“ is it a very nice smell ?
the contest lay not between love and duty .
speak the word , and , as you know , i would take you to the ends of the earth to-morrow .
“ she will make us pay for a whole week’s pension .
she descended slowly into the piazza with the intention of rejoining miss lavish , who was really almost too original .
but a shoddy lady writer and a journalist who had murdered his wife in the sight of god they should enter no villa at his introduction .
“ no of course , i’ll see .
freddy , whom his fellow-creatures never amused , suggested that the new people might be feeling a bit busy , and so on , since they had only just moved in .
” he was used to these nervous old maids and to the exaggerated importance that they attach to words .
“ emerson , freddy ?
cecil greeted him rather critically .
cecil believed in her ;
i honour the woman for her irish visit .’ the woman !
mr beebe’s eyes rested on windy corner , where lucy sat , practising mozart .
they had fair warning , and now he calls it an elopement .
” and he hurried off to the stables .
“ poor old man !
he will change the subject , as did mr beebe , saying cheerfully :
i realized dimly enough that she might take some momentous step .
“ oh , mr emerson , whatever do you mean ?
she then made her usual remark , which was “ how i do wish freddy and your mother could see this , too !
but lucy had developed since the spring .
do you remember before , when you refused the room with the view ?
he had no glimpse of the comradeship after which the girl’s soul yearned .
it is one of the things that have suggested to us eternal comradeship .
“ either i’m mad , or else he is , and i’m inclined to think it’s the latter .
freddy leant by him , smoking a pendant pipe .
but as you said it is my affair .
“ how tired one gets , ” said miss bartlett .
you go away .
“ whoever were those unfortunate people ?
how delightfully warm !
he looked at her , instead of through her , for the first time since they were engaged .
anne , putting down each plate as if it were a wedding present , stimulated them greatly .
it might be possible to be nice to her ;
as no explanation was forthcoming , she shook off the subject as too difficult for a girl , and led him further into the wood , pausing every now and then at some particularly beautiful or familiar combination of the trees .
she is too unconventional for him .
it is you they really want ;
mr vyse is so sensitive .
“ that’s the best conversational opening i’ve ever heard .
miss honeychurch , they trusted , would take care to equip herself duly .
but her attention wandered to george’s mother , who according to mr eager had been murdered in the sight of god and according to her son had seen as far as hindhead .
lucy kissed her also .
they were admiring luca signorelli of course , quite stupidly .
“ very well , dear , ” said miss bartlett , with a faint flush of pleasure that called forth a deep flush of shame on the cheeks of lucy .
the misery that would be saved if we confessed that !
good men first , violets afterwards .
of course i’m not tired of windy corner .
” saturn was a tennis-ball whose skin was partially unsewn .
“ but the string never broke ?
they were nearing the edge of the promontory , and the view was stealing round them , but the brown network of the bushes shattered it into countless pieces .
unable to answer this question , she put down his sock , which she was trying to mend , and gazed out through the window .
” she demanded , and her mother , with sudden tenderness , said :
“ but you can call it italy if it makes you less unhappy .
miss bartlett accepted their moneys and then said :
so she unpinned it carefully , and put it between two pieces of blotting-paper to keep it clean for him .
you saw him bathing ?
mr eager , who suffered from an over-fluent tongue rather than a resolute will , was determined to make himself heard .
“ i will bow , ” she had thought .
“ lucy used to be nearly as stupid as i am , but it’ll be very different now , mother thinks .
he hinted this to her , and she accepted the hint eagerly .
it must be you .
lucy entered this army when she pretended to george that she did not love him , and pretended to cecil that she loved no one .
in the chords that herald the conclusion he heard the hammer strokes of victory .
beethoven , ” and mr beebe was wondering whether it would be adelaida , or the march of the ruins of athens , when his composure was disturbed by the opening bars of opus iii .
i wish you weren’t so kind .
go please .
who could foretell that she and george would meet in the rout of a civilization , amidst an army of coats and collars and boots that lay wounded over the sunlit earth ?
there is my sister actually nursing the hot-water can ;
then be his wife .
“ it is another example of my decadence .
miss lavish did not seem pleased at this .
“ you don’t know what the word means .
she was turning to go as he woke up .
there lay the pond , set in its little alp of green only a pond , but large enough to contain the human body , and pure enough to reflect the sky .
lucy returned the kiss , still covering one cheek with her hand .
“ i have news of you at last !
such a senseless lie , too , yet it shattered her nerves and made her connect these emersons , friends of cecil’s , with a pair of nondescript tourists .
he had failed in his duties to the country-side , and the country-side was laughing at him as well .
most of these houses were larger than windy corner , and were filled by people who came , not from the district , but from london , and who mistook the honeychurches for the remnants of an indigenous aristocracy .
they followed him up the bank attempting the tense yet nonchalant expression that is suitable for ladies on such occasions .
“ oh , i wouldn’t do that , freddy , i wouldn’t do that with all this muddle .
“ it happened like this , if it happened at all .
we know that already .
he knew the people who never walked about with baedekers , who had learnt to take a siesta after lunch , who took drives the pension tourists had never heard of , and saw by private influence galleries which were closed to them .
“ i know i know .
the exact site of the murder was occupied , not by a ghost , but by miss lavish , who had the morning newspaper in her hand .
“ miss lavish tried miss pole , myself , everyone , and finally said :
he bore her down .
miss bartlett had lost a mackintosh square .
” it seemed to her that everyone else was behaving very badly .
neither george nor freddy was truly refined .
“ oh , let me congratulate you !
certainly many of the immigrants were rather dull , and lucy realized this more vividly since her return from italy .
“ otherwise , ” she repeated as if the word held finality .
here , apparently , was one of those points that the male intellect misses .
“ oh , stop now you have come , ” said lucy lightly .
“ a parson fenceless would mean a parson defenceless .
“ i don’t want to make difficulties , but it really isn’t fair on the maids to fill up the house so .
she had been a little frightened , both by miss lavish and by mr eager , she knew not why .
it was all right for you but most awkward for everyone else .
he no more thought of putting you under an obligation than he thought of being polite .
do you know any such ?
all morning she would be really nice to her .
“ now some beethoven ” called cecil , when the querulous beauty of the music had died .
“ so i hoped other people would think , but they don’t seem to .
to lucy who could not see that mr emerson was profoundly religious , and differed from mr beebe chiefly by his acknowledgment of passion it seemed dreadful that the old man should crawl into such a sanctum , when he was unhappy , and be dependent on the bounty of a clergyman .
i want you to have your own thoughts even when i hold you in my arms .
love is eternal .
“ they were covered with blood .
“ it is always terrible when the promise of months is destroyed in a moment , ” enunciated miss bartlett .
the passage was blocked by a wardrobe , which the removal men had failed to carry up the stairs .
and how very cold !
“ freddy has taken him into the dining-room .
yes , i always connect those florentine emersons with violets .
only this morning she had confused francesco francia with piero della francesca , and cecil had said , “ what !
don’t explain .
m .
” said the ladies mechanically .
how glorious it was !
“ it might be london .
indeed , most necessary .
lucy , though she wished never to see the emersons again , was not disposed to condemn them on a single word .
cecil made one talk in one’s own way .
it is more important that i should look up gods in the dictionary than that i should help my mother ;
ah !
i know myself how water preys upon one’s mind .
she is finishing .
we want you to have a nice restful visit at windy corner , with no worriting .
“ is it typical of country society ?
surely that makes it more excusable .
then persephone got down from the box .
“ more every moment .
george had turned at the sound of her arrival .
“ oh , mrs honeychurch , you aren’t going ?
“ perhaps as a student of human nature , ” interposed miss lavish , “ like myself ?
i know little and care less about that ;
he seems to see good in everyone .
“ joseph emery prank .
“ you know mr beebe’s funny way , when you never quite know what he means .
it was the old , old battle of the room with the view .
i i suppose he has .
ahem !
“ what a nuisance !
“ come along ;
this pension is a failure .
that was the question which mr eager hoped to solve now .
lucy thought of a very good remark .
mr beebe ignored the remark .
she was as scarlet as if he had put the thing most indelicately .
” echoed persephone in her glorious contralto .
italy and london are the only places where i don’t feel to exist on sufferance .
man has to pick up the use of his functions as he goes along especially the function of love .
” he asked .
“ yes , but they pay extra for wine .
on either side of it was a shallow ravine , filled with ferns and pine-trees , and down the ravine on the left ran the highway into the weald .
it is that love and youth matter intellectually .
but mother says nonsense , a tramp .
just think of all the trouble i took for nothing !
she’s in the drawing-room .
“ which way shall we go ?
“ perhaps we ought to send miss honeychurch down to her mother .
lucy was much annoyed , and replied as follows :
the ghoulish fashion in which respectable people will nibble after blood .
after all , he knew nothing about them , and pension joys , pension sorrows , are flimsy things ;
lucy , when admonished , began to move to and fro between the rooms , more conscious of the discomforts of packing by candlelight than of a subtler ill .
he would be so pleased .
mr beebe slid away from such heavy treatment of the subject .
“ lucy ;
she told me also that she has a high opinion of the destiny of woman mr eager !
“ no in the surrey hills .
i am going to greece .
“ i want to be truthful , ” she whispered .
“ why is it , lucy , that you always say the road ?
i see him , lucy ;
” she added merrily , “ i don’t see you’re such a splendid player , though .
i have put my foot in it with cecil most awfully .
“ what ?
in the audible whisper that was now so familiar to lucy they began to discuss , not alessio baldovinetti , but the drive .
“ my dear baby , how tiresome you’ve been !
“ what was that ?
trust whom ?
“ he is waking up .
there was something childish in those eyes , though it was not the childishness of senility .
“ none but the superficial would be shocked at her .
“ so would i , ” asserted freddy , backing his mother up backing up the spirit of her remark rather than the substance .
lucy , though she disliked the teacher , regarded the teaching as profound , and applied it to her lover .
there was no more heavy beneficence , no more attempts to dignify the situation with poetry or the scriptures .
“ what’s the good of a scene ?
it would be hard indeed if i stopped you doing as you liked at florence , when i am only here through your kindness .
” said mr eager , smiting his hands together as the carriages started again .
in a few moments lucy was equipped for battle .
“ there is only a certain amount of kindness in the world , ” said george , watching the sunlight flash on the panels of the passing carriages .
oh , goodness , how cross i feel !
“ it is all right .
“ i suppose miss bartlett must come , since she boils eggs so well , ” said cecil , who was in rather a happier frame of mind , thanks to the admirable cooking .
your brother told me .
” asked lucy , with her brother’s head in her lap .
the emersons were fine people in their way .
“ but i love you , and i did think you loved me !
and this frightened her .
“ i will never forgive eleanor .
oh , lucy !
oh , how perfectly lovely !
lucy !
lucy picked up the book and glanced at the title listlessly , under a loggia .
“ i say , is anything on to-morrow week ?
if they had not stopped perhaps they might have been hurt .
mr beebe , do .
that is the true democracy .
ah , yes !
i blame you i blame you very much indeed .
whenever i speak he winces ;
“ nothing , mr emerson , except that he no longer interests me .
” she glanced at lucy proudly .
such a wrong is not easily forgotten .
she promised us south rooms with a view close together , instead of which here are north rooms , looking into a courtyard , and a long way apart .
as the years pass , they are censured .
“ true , everlastingly true , though my day is over , and though there is the result .
lucy was slow to follow what people said , but quick enough to detect what they meant .
kiss me again .
now come up to the house .
and give me those matches when you’ve done with them .
to cecil and lucy it promised something quite different personal love .
” and immediately she realized that this was what her cousin had intended all along .
take your time .
had he suggested that he was a star and that lucy was soaring up to reach him ?
we can never make friends with her or thank her .
“ we must face that , ” said miss bartlett , not liking to say that she had given notice already .
and here comes the victoria .
and the girl again thought :
can’t you speak again to him now ?
she longed to shout the words :
“ we must not submit , ” said mr eager .
” he lowered his voice .
“ come down , o maid , from yonder mountain height , what pleasure lives in height (the shepherd sang) .
“ i don’t know what you mean , mother ;
you or your son will return our calls before ten days have elapsed .
“ but it is , as you say , a very sad thing .
cecil all over again .
” said the son , addressing the young lady for the first time .
oh , the britisher abroad !
he knew we should go off in the spring he has known it for six months that if mother wouldn’t give her consent we should take the thing into our own hands .
lucy still sat at the piano with her hands over the keys .
unaware of his own profundity , freddy checked himself .
it is nonsense .
did you realize that you would find all the pension bertolini down here ?
the bushes above them closed .
“ these abrupt changes of vegetation this little spongeous tract of water plants , and on either side of it all the growths are tough or brittle heather , bracken , hurts , pines .
it was this promontory , uncultivated , wet , covered with bushes and occasional trees , which had caught the fancy of alessio baldovinetti nearly five hundred years before .
” mr beebe bowed .
he led them now towards the bracken where freddy sat concealed .
and let me give you all fair warning :
“ all modern books are bad , ” said cecil , who was annoyed at her inattention , and vented his annoyance on literature .
“ so you think i ought to have accepted their offer ?
” said mr beebe , though at the bottom of his heart , he thought them silly little things .
nor has she any system of revolt .
“ i must go , ” she said gravely .
he assumed that much , and he had no hesitation in discussing lucy with her .
she hailed them briskly .
” for miss bartlett had announced that she at all events was one for church .
no one opens my letters .
cecil , who was rather crushed on the front seat of the victoria , felt irritable , and determined not to say anything interesting again .
i must ask you to release me , and try to forget that there ever was such a foolish girl .
“ my poor dear , did you suppose that this was his first ?
now , you are to tell me absolutely everything that you saw from the beginning .
if only she could remember how to behave !
a young man melancholy because the universe wouldn’t fit , because life was a tangle or a wind , or a yes , or something !
she still clung to the hope that she and charlotte loved each other , heart and soul .
i don’t believe in these london educations ” he broke off , remembering that he had had one himself , and concluded , “ at all events , not for women .
i can’t , i really can’t turn out miss flack .
her first morning was ruined , and she might never be in florence again .
even men might suffer from unexplained desires , and need help .
“ george mind tennis on sunday !
he’s only for an acquaintance .
i said don’t interfere with cissie villa .
the sentence is confused , but the better illustrates lucy’s state of mind , for she was trying to talk to mr beebe at the same time .
punishment followed quickly .
the cab-driver , who at once saluted him with the hiss of a serpent , might be that very phaethon who had set this happiness in motion twelve months ago .
“ perhaps he had .
he had won a victory over them .
miss bartlett , smarting under an obligation , would scarcely be civil .
can’t i be trusted to face the truth but i must get it second-hand through you ?
here and there a restriction annoyed her particularly , and she would transgress it , and perhaps be sorry that she had done so .
as usual , she didn’t see why .
alas !
how are the miss alans ?
