which was not quite true .
oh , papa , oh !’ they really did howl out something in that way .
“ only ellen and i were disputing concerning your health .
with that the speaker came forward to the fire , panting and holding her hand to her side .
” she returned , laughing .
i shall not soon forget the effect my action produced .
mr heathcliff , you have nobody to love you ;
“ in his crossest humours , formerly , i liked him better than i do in his present curious mood .
“ have mercy on your own soul !
oh !
i urged my companion to hasten now and show his amiable humour , and he willingly obeyed ;
“ you are surely losing your reason .
“ the charge exploded , and the knife , in springing back , closed into its owner’s wrist .
unless you have something particular to say , i’m sure he won’t hear it now , ” i continued .
but you must hold your tongue about my uncle ;
i asked the reason .
“ for heaven’s sake , hurry down !
“ poor hindley !
you’ll perhaps think me rather inclined to become so , ” he added , making an effort to smile , “ if i try to describe the thousand forms of past associations and ideas he awakens or embodies .
she had altered so much since our separation .
it’s not often he’s fit to be seen .
i have found that you can be as stoical as anyone , when you please .
but i should like to hear how she is !
heathcliff , if i were you , i’d go stretch myself over her grave and die like a faithful dog .
he’ll not seem to you so gentle and kind at first , perhaps , because it is not his way :
“ i shall not stand to be laughed at .
they are odious beings .
“ accursed witch !
you know i was wild after she died ;
only varied by solitary rambles on the moors , and visits to the grave of his wife , mostly at evening , or early morning before other wanderers were abroad .
bring the things in :
but instead of proceeding to dry it up , he joined his hands and began a prayer , which excited my laughter from its odd phraseology .
i put the orange in his hand , and bade him tell his father that a woman called nelly dean was waiting to speak with him , by the garden gate .
i’ve done my ironing .
the day being wet , she could not divert herself with rambling about the park ;
linton shivered , and glanced at her , half supplicating , half ashamed ;
i’ll not come here , then ;
it divined in secret , and brooded on the dreadful probability , gradually ripening into certainty .
i wish you were at the ” commenced my host , setting the candle on a chair , because he found it impossible to hold it steady .
“ it’s well the hellish villain has kept his word !
“ what should ail them ?
i have my eyes on it :
the light leaped from his hold to a distance of some feet , and his agitation was so extreme , that he could hardly pick it up .
“ oh , ellen !
” i said .
he appeared to have bent his malevolence on making him a brute :
i’ll believe you are a coward , for yourself , but not a cowardly betrayer of your best friend .
when i sat in the house with hareton , it seemed that on going out i should meet her ;
and , as i passed in , i asked , “ how was the baby ?
gimmerton chapel bells were still ringing ;
“ they are afraid of nothing , ” i grumbled , watching their approach through the window .
he sent a rapid glance through the half-open door of the chamber , and , ascertaining that what i stated was apparently true , delivered the house of his luckless presence .
“ i have :
“ and i won’t conceal that i have been sadly disappointed with our meeting ;
“ what is that ?
“ you are worse than twenty foes , you poisonous friend !
i wish to see my bed-room .
how dare you show your giddiness here ?
for she could be soft and mild as a dove , and she had a gentle voice and pensive expression :
i grew very uncomfortable , meanwhile ;
that the least sudden noise set her all in a quiver , and that she coughed troublesomely sometimes :
you won’t believe that vile nonsense .
he might have stuck a knife into her neck , she started round in such a taking .
mr linton summoned me , and with great difficulty , and after resorting to many means , we managed to restore her to sensation ;
by that time her ankle was thoroughly cured , and her manners much improved .
no !
owing to an accident at the commencement of march , he became for some days a fixture in the kitchen .
“ i’m jealous for you .
i don’t think the master can see him .
it will take him till dark , and he’ll never know .
“ you’d rather hear nothing about it , i suppose , then , mr linton ?
mrs earnshaw expected him by supper-time on the third evening , and she put the meal off hour after hour ;
and he took a grim pleasure , apparently , in exciting the aversion rather than the esteem of his few acquaintance .
” he said ;
but am i never to see her , because my father forbids me to go to her home , and you forbid her to come to mine ?
it’s not long ;
your veins are full of ice-water ;
tell me the meaning of this strange talk , and i will .
he was very careful , for some minutes , that his face should not be seen , and when he did raise it , he was sadly puzzled where to turn his eyes .
“ i’ve brought you something to eat , ” said a voice ;
“ nonsense !
“ yesterday , you know , mr earnshaw should have been at the funeral .
send me a kind note to-morrow , and leave to join you anywhere you please , except at thrushcross grange .
a minute previously she was violent ;
“ you must exchange horses with me :
he has just come home at dawn , and gone upstairs to his chamber ;
he’s such a cobweb , a pinch would annihilate him ;
the intruder was mrs heathcliff .
so i rose and covered it with a shawl .
because he could not accompany catherine .
“ i shall not know that till it comes , ” he said ;
her affection tired very soon , however , and when she grew peevish , hindley became tyrannical .
i instinctively echoed the words she had uttered a few hours before :
“ there are many things to be considered before that question can be answered properly , ” i said , sententiously .
“ show me a chamber .
quite unable to right himself , because of his friendlessness , and his ignorance that he has been wronged .
i never thought but you were sunk in the blackhorse marsh , and missy with you , till master told me you’d been found , and he’d lodged you here !
terminating his command with a sequel of horrid imprecations too bad to repeat or remember .
and i must give her plenty of provision for herself and beasts :
“ you are a dog in the manger , cathy , and desire no one to be loved but yourself !
after exchanging numerous marks of fondness with him , his cousin went to mr heathcliff , who lingered by the door , dividing his attention between the objects inside and those that lay without :
he answered , no ;
“ by heaven and hell , you’ve sworn between you to murder that child !
” muttered joseph , towards whom i had been steering .
and i mentally abused old linton for (what was only natural partiality) the securing his estate to his own daughter , instead of his son’s .
however , i went , through wind and rain , and brought one , the doctor , back with me ;
i could hardly fancy it the same individual i had beheld on the day i discovered my little lady at wuthering heights , after her expedition to the crags .
determined to admit them in spite of the prohibition , should they return .
which , however , i took care not to notice .
i was so vexed , i flung my tray and its contents on the ground ;
and , though we should quarrel the next moment , i must forgive him again .
and she pitied them , too ;
he had an aversion to yielding so completely to his feelings , choosing rather to absent himself ;
i went about my household duties , convinced that the grange had but one sensible soul in its walls , and that lodged in my body .
but one night , while leaning on his shoulder , in the act of saying she thought she should be able to get up to-morrow , a fit of coughing took her a very slight one he raised her in his arms ;
you should have given us notice !
hareton never touches me :
are you sure you hate me ?
“ it is your fault , ellen , ” he said ;
mine has nothing valuable about it ;
and said you despised me ;
“ one time , however , we were near quarrelling .
i wish i had not taken that .
and gently intimated that mr linton must allow an interview soon , or he should fear he was purposely deceiving him with empty promises .
but , to prevent disputes , i desire their union , and am resolved to bring it about .
i thought as i lay there , with my head against that table leg , and my eyes dimly discerning the grey square of the window , that i was enclosed in the oak-panelled bed at home ;
i’m sartin on’t .
perhaps they exaggerate his illness ?
“ you’ve seen me before , sir .
i believed no such thing , so i kept it to myself and brought her some tea and dry toast .
and i love him .
i’ve given over crying :
how can you deliberately get up such paltry falsehoods ?
nor did i describe all his father’s brutal conduct my intentions being to add no bitterness , if i could help it , to his already overflowing cup .
ellen , what do you think ?
go and see if i have not spoken truth :
never led a single step towards virtue , or guarded by a single precept against vice .
ye’re a raight nowt ;
have you ever been here in your life before ?
moving his lantern jaws meanwhile , and surveying my dress and countenance (the former a great deal too fine , but the latter , i’m sure , as sad as he could desire) with sovereign contempt .
those two who have left the room are the only objects which retain a distinct material appearance to me ;
and , if they were bare , i could scarcely distinguish a foot in advance .
the family had just finished breakfast :
infernal !
” i inquired .
to do as i was ordered .
“ get off wi’ ye !
he stopped on observing his error :
mrs linton eyed him with a droll expression half angry , half laughing at his fastidiousness .
i’m not afraid !
the abrupt descent of penistone crags particularly attracted her notice ;
the scene was over in two minutes ;
cathy ran to me instead of linton , and knelt down and put her burning cheek on my lap , weeping aloud .
my great thought in living is himself .
and , at first , it gave me delightful relief to observe , in hurrying by the farmhouse , charlie , the fiercest of the pointers , lying under a window , with swelled head and bleeding ear .
“ very well and i will have some to exhibit to papa !
then she looked at him ;
“ she often talked of uncle , and i learnt to love him long ago .
” he resumed , at last fain , notwithstanding his hardihood , to have a support behind him ;
you may guess how i felt at hearing this news .
half-past twelve .
” i did not relish the notion of deliberately fastening myself in with heathcliff .
compare the present occasion with such an affliction as that , and be thankful for the friends you have , instead of coveting more .
and at last he placed his hat on his head , and walked grumbling forth .
and he never said miss :
i pray every night that i may live after him ;
“ this is your cousin cathy , linton , ” he said , putting their little hands together .
i shuddered to be near him , and thought on the servant’s ill-bred moroseness as comparatively agreeable .
“ always at nine in winter , and rise at four , ” said my host , suppressing a groan :
but i was rendered dumb in the middle of the first sentence , by a threat that i should be shown into a room by myself the very next syllable i uttered .
he neither spoke nor loosed his hold for some five minutes , during which period he bestowed more kisses than ever he gave in his life before , i daresay :
and whatever it was , it communicated , apparently , both pleasure and pain in exquisite extremes :
hindley is too reckless to select his acquaintance prudently :
“ no !
“ i do not ask , ” he said , “ that she may visit here ;
our adieux were limited to a hasty bow , and then i pushed forward , trusting to my own resources ;
and how did you like the master ?
don’t write , but come , and bring me something from edgar .
you’ve tired me go away , go away !
mr linton was a magistrate , and though he had fifty wives dead , he should inquire into this .
where , heedless of my expostulations and the growling thunder , and the great drops that began to plash around her , she remained , calling at intervals , and then listening , and then crying outright .
“ stop , ” she cried , “ you must listen to me first ;
” she went on , gathering fresh grief from reflection , and flinging herself into my arms for refuge from the idea .
“ could you believe in the existence of such a colossal dunce ?
what have you done so for ?
the havoc that months had previously wrought was now emulated by the inroads of hours .
mr edgar seldom mustered courage to visit wuthering heights openly .
don’t , miss catherine !
but you might as well bid a man struggling in the water rest within arms’ length of the shore !
he leant his two elbows on his knees , and his chin on his hands , and remained rapt in dumb meditation .
” she continued , striking it with childish spite , “ and then i’ll burn it !
“ you’d better do it at once , ” he persisted , escaping to the porch (they were in the stable) :
“ an idle whim , i fear , sir , ” was my answer ;
i’ve a good mind to turn them out of the house this moment !
“ do sit still another half-hour .
“ ony books that yah leave , i shall tak’ into th’ hahse , ” said joseph , “ and it’ll be mitch if yah find ’em agean ;
he died blissfully , mr lockwood :
don’t forget .
he was crying terribly ;
i was superstitious about dreams then , and am still ;
i insist on perfect sobriety and silence .
you must say why ?
“ why ?
if so , is he mad ?
“ she’s ill , ” said hindley , taking her wrist ;
“ the night through , ” he repeated .
mr linton and his daughter would frequently walk out among the reapers ;
i insisted on the funeral being respectable .
you told me to ramble where i pleased , while you sauntered on with mr heathcliff !
the curate might set as many chapters as he pleased for catherine to get by heart , and joseph might thrash heathcliff till his arm ached ;
and shoo’s another ;
and i was foolish enough to imagine the memory of her mother might disarm him from desiring her injury .
linton had slid from his seat on to the hearthstone , and lay writhing in the mere perverseness of an indulged plague of a child , determined to be as grievous and harassing as it can .
by his knack of sermonising and pious discoursing , he contrived to make a great impression on mr earnshaw ;
but surely you and everybody have a notion that there is or should be an existence of yours beyond you .
i heard a malignant , crackly laugh by the fire , and turning , beheld that odious joseph standing rubbing his bony hands , and quivering .
the master was too gloomy to seek companionship with any people , good or bad ;
if once i find it open he’s done for ;
but sitting such a while at the heights had done the mischief .
and he’ll be flogged :
“ because they are a great deal higher up than we are , ” replied i ;
and he wrote to bid me get mourning for his daughter , and arrange a room , and other accommodations , for his youthful nephew .
i put my basin on a tray , and went myself to fetch some more milk .
and five minutes after i felt one little pulse at her heart , and nothing more !
and then we kissed each other and were friends .
she came into the kitchen once to speak to her old one ;
i remembered the eyes .
i went in ;
if you do , act the nurse ;
the uncivil little thing stood on tiptoe , and whispered a sentence in heathcliff’s ear .
“ a pity , ” observed i .
linton will conjecture how it is , and trouble himself no further about you .
we were both of us nodding ere any one invaded our retreat , and then it was joseph , shuffling down a wooden ladder that vanished in the roof , through a trap :
there’s a pack o’ corn i’ t’ corner , thear , meeterly clane ;
“ what !
my master , perceiving that she would not take his word for her uncle-in-law’s evil disposition , gave a hasty sketch of his conduct to isabella , and the manner in which wuthering heights became his property .
but that i didn’t learn till some time afterwards .
how foolish to reveal those talons to him .
he does not know what being in love is !
“ how how dare you , under my roof ?
go on .
and thus compelled perforce to accept lodgings under his roof .
he was in earnest :
her features were so sad , they did not seem hers :
thank hivin for all !
when he came , and i requested admittance and tried to open the door , i found it locked ;
“ worse than when i saw you last ;
“ is he not rich enough to keep the estate in good order ?
the lower fruit had disappeared , but only birds could touch the upper , except from cathy’s present station .
but heathcliff affirms his principal reason for resuming a connection with his ancient persecutor is a wish to install himself in quarters at walking distance from the grange , and an attachment to the house where we lived together ;
“ let me in let me in !
oh !
no !
you’re too young to rest always contented , living by yourself ;
the sun shone yellow on its grey head , reminding me of summer ;
i expect you to feel flattered .
she was not one that would have disturbed the house much on her own account .
“ go to linton now , as i told you ;
now that she’s dead , i see her in hindley :
his daughter-in-law , on perceiving him through the window , immediately escaped to the kitchen , so that i remained alone .
“ hush , ” murmured linton ;
joseph held the door in his hand when i called to ask after her , and wouldn’t let me pass .
i do wish he would !
what are you on the point of complaining about , heathcliff ?
” he replied .
and now i opened my mouth for a “ good-morning , ” but closed it again , the salutation unachieved ;
“ you won’t let her , little idiot !
i felt that god had forsaken the stray sheep there to its own wicked wanderings , and an evil beast prowled between it and the fold , waiting his time to spring and destroy .
we had nearly finished , and the two young people prudently shifted wider asunder , so i anticipated no further disturbance during that sitting :
i appeared to feel the warm breath of it displacing the sleet-laden wind .
“ poor wretch !
one on ’em ’s a’most getten his finger cut off wi’ hauding t’ other fro’ stickin’ hisseln loike a cawlf .
“ it has been cutting red herrings .
“ oh , indeed ;
“ you are putting the question through very idle curiosity , ” he interrupted , with a laugh .
she would have had them to bed , but they begged sadly to be allowed to stay up ;
i supposed i should be condemned in hareton earnshaw’s heart , if not by his mouth , to the lowest pit in the infernal regions if i showed my unfortunate person in his neighbourhood then ;
” here she burst into uncontrollable grief , and the remainder of her words were inarticulate .
“ you were very wicked , mr heathcliff !
she had been servant there since the death of mr earnshaw .
i am worthless , and bad in temper , and bad in spirit , almost always ;
indeed , he was not yet certain that the grim , sneering stranger was his father .
i said heathcliff forced me to go in :
hasn’t he been intimate with mr heathcliff lately ?
you mustn’t touch him .
“ i should not allow any one to inconvenience me , if i could hinder it walk in !
that was not long .
i wondered greatly how it would end .
the place of catherine’s interment , to the surprise of the villagers , was neither in the chapel under the carved monument of the lintons , nor yet by the tombs of her own relations , outside .
“ then he would write to you , and there’d never be an end of it .
i asked if the master was in ?
“ order ellen to say you are engaged , cathy , ” he persisted ;
“ she would have me to cut her a hazel switch , and then she leapt her galloway over the hedge yonder , where it is lowest , and galloped out of sight .
he began to pace the room , muttering terrible things to himself , till i was inclined to believe , as he said joseph did , that conscience had turned his heart to an earthly hell .
the employment pleased both mightily .
“ he had business to keep him in the north , ” i answered , “ and your mother’s health required her to reside in the south .
she looked very well , and very handsome ;
“ and so do i .
besides , he might come and begin a string of abuse or complainings ;
it required a great deal of labour to satisfy the old man that heathcliff was not the aggressor ;
and , as we floundered on , my companion wearied me with constant reproaches that i had not brought a pilgrim’s staff :
“ fie , fie , miss !
he followed my guidance without waste of words , and i ushered him into the presence of the master and mistress , whose flushed cheeks betrayed signs of warm talking .
and i told her the master was going to thrushcross grange , and earnshaw and i needn’t hinder her from descending ;
and she was the fondest nurse that ever watched .
he did not strike it off , either .
he twined himself up to her , as she half knelt by the settle , and converted her shoulder into a support .
are you feeling better this morning ?
i was never so beaten with anything in my life :
i’m no coward .
yet that old man by the kitchen fire affirms he has seen two on ’em looking out of his chamber window on every rainy night since his death :
do you think he could bear to see me grow fat and merry could bear to think that we were tranquil , and not resolve on poisoning our comfort ?
and therefore i must get quite away .
it tired me dreadfully writing those long letters .
not so far , but you may walk over here when you get hearty .
the stanchions stood too close to suffer his shoulders to follow , and i smiled , exulting in my fancied security .
but it was succeeded by an interval of impatient , fretful weariness ;
and i began to doze .
he was a plain rough man ;
oh !
and both times together you have seen linton hardly four hours in your life !
“ you can’t alter what you’ve done , ” he replied pettishly , shrinking from her , “ unless you alter it for the worse by teasing me into a fever .
heathcliff had gone to loose the beast , and shift it to his own stall ;
whether catherine had spent her tears , or whether the grief were too weighty to let them flow , she sat there dry-eyed till the sun rose :
not even a book from which i might tear a leaf .
he sat within earshot , milking the cows by the light of a lantern , which i seized unceremoniously , and , calling out that i would send it back on the morrow , rushed to the nearest postern .
there was a start and a troubled gleam of recollection , and a struggle to arrange her ideas .
“ climb to that hillock , pass that bank , and by the time you reach the other side i shall have raised the birds .
take her there if she comes to see thee :
nob’dy could mistake him , besides put a sovereign in her father’s hand for payment .
she proceeded :
“ all , all is against me :
i walked round the yard , and through a wicket , to another door , at which i took the liberty of knocking , in hopes some more civil servant might show himself .
i shall have no rest till i do !
but his father kept a sharp watch over him ;
and my master , though he cast more than one reproachful look at me , said nothing till she had concluded .
“ none o’ me !
why should i ?
“ con-trary !
on opening the little door , two hairy monsters flew at my throat , bearing me down , and extinguishing the light ;
not because i need it , but ” he turned abruptly to the fire , and continued , with what , for lack of a better word , i must call a smile “ i’ll tell you what i did yesterday !
she even disgraces the name of linton ;
but it escaped in a sigh instead of a sentence .
catherine was mute .
“ how do you contrive to live here without them ?
and the heroine was married .
and , to begin my kindness , joseph , bring the lad some breakfast .
i am a worthless , cowardly wretch :
but he could make nothing of her evasive replies , and was obliged to close the examination unsatisfactorily ;
“ i’ll never let you in , not if you beg for twenty years .
i swear , on my salvation , he’s going to his grave , and none but you can save him !
“ or rather with me .
i showed another , keeping it out of his reach .
“ where is the use of the devil in that sentence ?
we crept through a broken hedge , groped our way up the path , and planted ourselves on a flower-plot under the drawing-room window .
i’d rather have a ballad , though :
he is ingenious and unresting in seeking to gain my abhorrence !
it asserted its own tranquillity , which seemed a pledge of equal quiet to its former inhabitant .
next time you may gather intelligence for yourself !
her companion rose up , but he hadn’t time to express his feelings further , for a horse’s feet were heard on the flags , and having knocked gently , young linton entered , his face brilliant with delight at the unexpected summons he had received .
“ were you not ashamed to disturb the dead ?
his private feelings entirely disapproved of the exterior of his new abode .
and what absurd nonsense it was to yield to that sense of horror .
“ don’t you see that face ?
and that is the slavering , shivering thing you preferred to me !
she wants none of your tears !
“ cathy , this lamb of yours threatens like a bull !
“ yes , now and then , ” i answered .
“ with your husband’s money , miss catherine ?
linton had sunk prostrate again in another paroxysm of helpless fear , caused by his father’s glance towards him , i suppose :
“ not bitten , are you ?
but , alas !
i did pity her then , i’m sure :
i don’t want to be troubled with more sickness here .
let us make haste .
“ we are vanquished !
i’ll crush his ribs in like a rotten hazel-nut before i cross the threshold !
i hate you now !
what should i have done , ellen ?
and i , on purpose , had sought a bit of work in some unripped fringes of the window-curtain , keeping my eye steadily fixed on her proceedings .
” said the boy , mistaking our approach for that of his negligent attendant .
the old servant confirmed this statement , but muttered :
poor lad !
having swept the hearth and wiped the table , i departed ;
no , come here , miss catherine , now and then :
the more the worms writhe , the more i yearn to crush out their entrails !
and , in his eyes , heathcliff seemed a murderer .
it’s mine :
” he said .
” replied cathy .
i’m sorry i disturbed you .
and there !
you knew it a while since .
you mustn’t go and leave , after all .
standing over me , heaving with malevolence , as i reluctantly delivered the account in answer to his questions .
“ so you won’t be my friend ?
now , don’t wince , and colour up !
“ i’ll show you how far i’ve progressed in the black art :
we’ve allas summut o’ either side in us .
but it was , in my imagination , that dismal night ;
and seizing the children each by an arm , whispered them to “ frame upstairs , and make little din they might pray alone that evening he had summut to do .
where , joseph asseverated , owd nick’ would fetch us as sure as we were living :
“ keep your eft’s fingers off ;
wuthering heights was the goal of my proposed excursion .
oh !
this bed is the fairy cave under penistone crags , and you are gathering elf-bolts to hurt our heifers ;
mr earnshaw was , of course , invited to attend the remains of his sister to the grave ;
but hers has been removed , or else you might see something of what she was .
oh , give me the poker !
and you must have led the way in writing such absurdities :
catherine leaned her head and arms on the table , till she heard the slight rustle of the covering being removed ;
all his rudeness and all his surly harshness had deserted him :
“ this morning , when i came down , about half an hour before noon , mr earnshaw was sitting by the fire , deadly sick ;
as it was , being instructed , he returned an answer , intimating that mr heathcliff objected to his calling at the grange ;
i could not pursue them , however ;
and he told me once to ask the housekeeper whether he ever came into the village ?
but the house of wuthering heights is so large that the inmates have plenty of space for withdrawing out of its influence ;
then it is with mrs heathcliff you must settle , ” she observed ;
” i continued .
now and then i was happy :
and i beheld a couple of persons arrest her , one of whom i felt convinced was mr heathcliff himself .
“ catherine , unless we are to have cold tea , please to come to the table , ” interrupted linton , striving to preserve his ordinary tone , and a due measure of politeness .
the jonah , in my mind , was mr earnshaw ;
be quick , and bring another .
” said she .
he fixed his eye on me longer than i cared to return the stare , for fear i might be tempted either to box his ears or render my hilarity audible .
” i asked .
its window , as i mentioned before , is wide enough for anybody to get through ;
from which , it struck me then , all the misfortunes of my employers sprang .
there’s no use waiting any longer on that foolish boy :
i came to a stone where the highway branches off on to the moor at your left hand ;
the consequence was that , perforce , he was condemned to the fireside and tranquillity , till he made it up again .
he looked frightful ;
the second question i have great interest in ;
“ to hear you , people might think you were the mistress !
oh , i’m aching all over !
i considered it best to confess my presence ;
he would have pitied the child on his own account ;
“ rough as a saw-edge , and hard as whinstone !
but his wife expressed such pleasure at the white floor and huge glowing fireplace , at the pewter dishes and delf-case , and dog-kennel , and the wide space there was to move about in where they usually sat , that he thought it unnecessary to her comfort , and so dropped the intention .
and yet i did hope , and began to cheer up under the prospect of retaining my home and my employment , and , above all , my beloved young mistress ;
“ and to-morrow , catherine , will you be here to-morrow ?
“ naughty ellen !
“ who ?
“ explain your son’s character .
” she returned .
“ having uttered this speech , she vanished again .
“ i require to be let alone !
i’d not care one moment for linton being heathcliff’s son ;
the rest of my visits were dreary and troubled :
i shall be a great deal more comfortable now ;
but , supposing at twelve years old i had been wrenched from the heights , and every early association , and my all in all , as heathcliff was at that time , and been converted at a stroke into mrs linton , the lady of thrushcross grange , and the wife of a stranger :
and , having fetched the pony round to the door , he took , to propitiate her , a fine crooked-legged terrier whelp from the kennel , and putting it into her hand , bid her whist !
good-night !
“ i must blow the coals red first , before i can carry any , ” i replied , getting a chair and the bellows .
he’ll not harm you :
“ i only wish i knew the best way !
you shall have a daily taste , if i catch such a devil of a temper in your eyes again !
“ how must i do ?
therefore , she must have married my son .
for we feared particularly to go into his presence when he had been some time alone .
“ some time i’ll tell him so .
“ i’ll put my trash away , because you can make me if i refuse , ” answered the young lady , closing her book , and throwing it on a chair .
she had no peer ;
“ she wasn’t as happy as master :
there were scarcely six months between them .
i attempted to steal to the door with an intention of calling her husband ;
minny and i went flying home as light as air ;
” she asked .
and you conspire with him against me , do you , viper ?
“ i believe the dead are at peace :
skulker has caught a little girl , sir ,’ he replied ;
she wept to miss one evening , because you would be disappointed ;
it was scarcely noon , and i conceived that i might as well pass the night under my own roof as in an inn .
which , on examination , i ascertained to have been taken from a locket hung round catherine’s neck .
and i’m thirsty .
you are miserable , are you not ?
her humour was a mere vane for constantly varying caprices .
” she pursued , anxiously .
he had grown a tall , athletic , well-formed man ;
“ but you should be in the field now , heathcliff .
” repeated he , peering in linton’s face , and subduing his voice to a whisper , for fear of being overheard .
he bled her , and he told me to let her live on whey and water-gruel , and take care she did not throw herself downstairs or out of the window ;
“ eea , f’r owt ee knaw !
she placed a cushion under his head , and offered him some water ;
but i told her she had nothing to give , they were all , all mine .
” “ well , you will catch it !
“ well , i’ll tell you something !
it remained while i re-filled the grave , and led me home .
isabella ceased speaking , and took a drink of tea ;
yes , here are more !
“ no , ” i said , half smiling .
and behave like a gentleman , mind !
he says he has married me on purpose to obtain power over him ;
” said mr heathcliff , when he saw me .
“ were not you naughty ?
she seemed willing to do her best ;
but he’s no fool ;
for he was constantly getting coughs , and colds , and aches , and pains of some sort .
i getten summut else to do , ” he answered , and continued his work ;
get off !
the other did not look seventeen .
it was fastened ;
i shall not pity you , not i .
” i said , passionately .
in the evening , she said , the evening of my visit to the heights , i knew , as well as if i saw him , that mr heathcliff was about the place ;
i bid them be quiet , now that they saw me returned , and , benumbed to my very heart , i dragged upstairs ;
“ i wonder as much as you .
“ but i’ll not do anything , though you should swear your tongue out , except what i please !
blows , aimed at me , fell on other sconces .
yet i was sorry linton had that distorted nature .
” said nelly , conducting me into the house .
” she replied .
it will disturb him , for no good .
to me , he signified the threatening danger was not so much death , as permanent alienation of intellect .
she was at that time a charming young lady of eighteen ;
“ but it is not for that .
however , it must be acknowledged , she had faults to foil her gifts .
“ we don’t send playthings , ” cried catherine , her pride overcoming her shame .
the man took his charge stealthily across the grass towards the stable .
it was so dark that i could not see the means of exit ;
i was condemned to hear all out :
he threw himself into a chair , laughing and groaning , and bid them all stand off , for he was nearly killed he would not have such another walk for the three kingdoms .
her pretty face was wan and listless ;
“ ah !
heathcliff stood near the entrance , in his shirt and trousers ;
too liberally ;
because to-morrow i intend lengthening the night till afternoon .
she slipped her fork to the floor , and hastily dived under the cloth to conceal her emotion .
you left it open ;
i want to ask you two questions :
my master was obliged to attend ;
cathy began searching for some water ;
it revolted him :
well , never mind .
as he would have it that it did :
i beat him constantly ;
“ eighteen , sir :
let me look .
” i continued .
seeming to have got into his head the notion that , because he liked heathcliff , all hated , and longed to do him an ill-turn .
” cried linton .
linton can play the little tyrant well .
last sunday , indeed , coming earlier than usual , i heard him abusing poor linton cruelly for his conduct of the night before .
fit to cry , i took an orange from my pocket , and offered it to propitiate him .
this was worse than before :
and my companion halted half an hour , to inspect the park , and the gardens , and , probably , the place itself , as well as he could ;
and , i suspected , to my master also .
and suppose mr linton were spared till he saw sixty , that would be more years than you have counted , miss .
but happily my master had not quitted his apartment , and remained ignorant of our prolonged absence .
with mr heathcliff , grim and saturnine , on the one hand , and hareton , absolutely dumb , on the other , i made a somewhat cheerless meal , and bade adieu early .
” i demanded of the dame .
come !
h .
” began the religious elder .
mr linton would take her with him a mile or so outside , on rare occasions ;
it was a marvellous effort of perspicacity to discover that i did not love her .
and so still , that not only the murmur of the beck down gimmerton was distinguishable , but its ripples and its gurgling over the pebbles , or through the large stones which it could not cover .
hareton says he wakes and shrieks in the night by the hour together , and calls you to protect him from me ;
and , remembering mrs dean’s anecdote of his first attempt at enlightening the darkness in which he had been reared , i observed , “ but , mrs heathcliff , we have each had a commencement , and each stumbled and tottered on the threshold ;
the old feeling of indulgent tenderness overcame her vexation , and she grew thoroughly moved and alarmed .
your old friend hindley , ” he replied , “ and my wicked gossip :
” i continued .
“ catherine , love !
“ is not your father very ill ?
“ zillah is constantly gadding off to gimmerton since papa went :
“ how do you feel , catherine ?’ he repeated .
i tried to jump up ;
but , i thought in my mind , hindley , with apparently the stronger head , has shown himself sadly the worse and the weaker man .
and on catching sight of it i trembled in every limb .
your type is not a lamb , it’s a sucking leveret .
“ don’t vex me .
in this self-complacent conviction she departed ;
don’t repeat that horrid noise :
the first of the seventy-first is come .
he shall buy another , if he gets me back again .
“ papa would make you sing out , if you attempted to get there , ” he answered .
and the more feeble the master became , the more influence he gained .
“ no , god won’t have the satisfaction that i shall , ” he returned .
she had some reason to put the question , for shame and pride threw double gloom over his countenance , and kept him immovable .
“ take mine , ” said his father ;
“ eea , aw keep th’ hause , ” she replied .
and i spoke softly and put no questions , and avoided irritating him in any way .
his upright carriage suggested the idea of his having been in the army .
joseph affirms he’s sure he’s an altered man :
“ get up , and begone out of my sight ,’ said the mourner .
“ are you going to mak’ the tea ?
she sprang forward , and bursting into tears , threw her arms round my neck .
he sucked on like an innocent .
your cheeks are bloodless ;
at last , our curate (we had a curate then who made the living answer by teaching the little lintons and earnshaws , and farming his bit of land himself) advised that the young man should be sent to college ;
“ it is too hot for walking , let us rest here .
who visited her twice a day , and would have been rather more friendly , but her attempts at increasing kindness were proudly and promptly repelled .
mr heathcliff was nowhere visible ;
and how to leave my property i cannot determine .
why did you despise me ?
we deferred our excursion till the afternoon ;
he walked to the hearth in evident agitation ;
the four men came back unaccompanied also .
the cups and saucers were laid ready .
it rather dips down on the other side .
and that you would weary of nursing a sick man , and that man only your father .
“ now , darling , ” said mr linton , addressing his daughter , as they halted at the bottom of the front steps :
“ i wonder they don’t make his head ache .
he was relentless in worrying him about his soul’s concerns , and about ruling his children rigidly .
the following evening was very wet :
but few have slighter reasons for complaint than i had .
say you are certain i will !
i had found shelter in hareton’s room , and the old man , on seeing me , said , “ they’s rahm for boath ye un’ yer pride , now , i sud think i’ the hahse .
” and either joseph , the preacher , or i had committed the “ first of the seventy-first , ” and were to be publicly exposed and excommunicated .
this feather was picked up from the heath , the bird was not shot :
whose mind was occupied on other subjects than his company , as his countenance evinced ;
“ oh , it will be something worse , ” she said .
however , it was the business of nobody but me , and i interrupted mr heathcliff’s lecture by entering and telling him so .
but i guess it’s raight !
but his cousin’s patience was not sufficient to endure this enigmatical behaviour .
she thinks catherine haughty , and does not like her , i can guess by her talk .
i asked myself .
she must have had a warm heart , when she loved her father so , to give so much to me .
then , while the master and earnshaw were at breakfast , she entered the house , and asked all in a quiver if the doctor might be sent for ?
and her father insisted on her reading less , and taking more exercise .
i had not the heart to leave my charge ;
i despise him for himself , and hate him for the memories he revives !
“ i’ll keep him out five minutes ,’ he exclaimed .
“ i can sleep on a chair in this room , ” i replied .
till within a week of her death that gay heart never failed her ;
don’t tell papa .
we knew linton’s tones , and entered .
open the window again wide :
they have yearned towards it so long , and so unwaveringly , that i’m convinced it will be reached and soon because it has devoured my existence :
i could scarcely refrain from smiling at this antipathy to the poor fellow ;
i should scarcely have known you :
i , who had determined to hold myself independent of all social intercourse , and thanked my stars that , at length , i had lighted on a spot where it was next to impracticable i , weak wretch , after maintaining till dusk a struggle with low spirits and solitude , was finally compelled to strike my colours ;
do you know , miss linton , that brute hareton laughs at me !
my dreams appal me .
“ good words , ” i replied .
the little wretch had done her utmost to hurt her cousin’s sensitive though uncultivated feelings , and a physical argument was the only mode he had of balancing the account , and repaying its effects on the inflictor .
on the succeeding morning i was laid up , and during three weeks i remained incapacitated for attending to my duties :
” cried jabez , after a solemn pause , leaning over his cushion .
don’t make more mischief ;
and that will make mrs dean mad .
“ now , ellen , ” she said , when my task was finished and she was seated in an easy-chair on the hearth , with a cup of tea before her , “ you sit down opposite me , and put poor catherine’s baby away :
so he shall never know how i love him :
through winter nights and summer days she was a living hope at my side .
“ mr earnshaw invited me , when i called this morning .
devil !
the same conviction had stricken him as me , from the instant he beheld her , that there was no prospect of ultimate recovery there she was fated , sure to die .
i refused staunchly .
“ but he looked so different from his usual look that i stopped a moment to stare at him .
i had just fastened our pinafores together , and hung them up for a curtain , when in comes joseph , on an errand from the stables .
“ i love him more than ever you loved edgar , and he might love me , if you would let him !
when , ignorant where the narrow lobbies led , i stood still , and was witness , involuntarily , to a piece of superstition on the part of my landlord which belied , oddly , his apparent sense .
still , he felt gratified that she had accepted his assistance , and ventured to stand behind as she examined them , and even to stoop and point out what struck his fancy in certain old pictures which they contained ;
they detestably resemble linton’s .
i’ve recovered from my first desire to be killed by him :
and he gradually established his right to be expected .
asserting that she could not help it then , and being done , she had now no power to repeal it .
i hope i have misunderstood you , isabella ?
and here is a moor-cock’s ;
heathcliff dropped his slight hand , and stood looking at him coolly till he chose to speak .
” she pursued .
i’ll demolish the first who puts me out of temper !
a miser who has parted with a lucky lottery ticket for five shillings , and finds next day he has lost in the bargain five thousand pounds , could not show a blanker countenance than he did on beholding the figure of mr earnshaw above .
for her master had an odd notion about the chamber she would put me in , and never let anybody lodge there willingly .
who instantly commenced a lament that brought isabella and catherine hurrying to the place .
but i retired , confiding in her energy for a resting-place against my return .
the latter was speechless ;
it is singular at all times , then it was particularly striking ;
and glowered up at me defyingly , as he slavered into the jug .
“ catherine ill ?
and so you’ll allow it was useless making more stir about him !
we’ve odd reports up here .
it is not wise , at any rate this moist season .
i held the mistress’s post in making tea and carving ;
meantime , catherine paced up and down the floor , exclaiming “ i wonder where he is i wonder where he can be !
” and the change that transfigured her late happy countenance .
those showers would drench him through .
you shall go to the gallows for this .
“ and , catherine , don’t think or say that i’m very unwell :
desiring to have his reasons for liking him , i could only gather the sentences “ i known’t :
“ i wish i could hold you , ” she continued , bitterly , “ till we were both dead !
hindley calls him a vagabond , and won’t let him sit with us , nor eat with us any more ;
confused as catherine was , her wits were alert at applying our conversation .
nelly , take him in , and i’ll follow your advice concerning the doctor , without delay .
down with them !
hareton darkened :
why is he staying at wuthering heights , the house of a man whom he abhors ?
” continued the tiresome girl , appealing to me .
“ no matter i’m not accustomed to go to bed in the long hours .
“ papa would tell you , miss , ” i answered , hastily , “ that they are not worth the trouble of visiting .
only plodding doggedly down the wooden steps , and halting before an apartment which , from that halt and the superior quality of its furniture , i conjectured to be the best one .
“ mr heathcliff ?
but having desired a sup of water , while she drank it fell back , and she saw her very plain .
“ i’ll tie the riband .
there was the same man :
how dare you touch me ?
and then mr linton , to mend matters , paid us a visit himself on the morrow , and read the young master such a lecture on the road he guided his family , that he was stirred to look about him , in earnest .
he was invisible to her abstracted gaze .
and that sort of people should not either .
there now , hold ye still .
indulging her with a patient audience of all her real and imaginary adventures when she returned .
what kind of living will it be when you oh , god !
very like the robbers were for putting them through the window to open the doors to the gang after all were asleep , that they might murder us at their ease .
deriding and ridiculing all mr heathcliff’s assertions about his son , as if i were certain she would coincide .
” he asked , thrusting the tray under heathcliff’s nose .
“ ellen , i’ll burn that door down but i’ll get out .
but explaining that he must no longer expect to see catherine at wuthering heights .
i’ll teach thee to impose on a good-hearted , deluded father .
” he interrupted , perceiving my intention to depart .
that i set down as a speech meant for edgar’s ears ;
now all is dashed wrong ;
but the pupil claimed a reward , and received at least five kisses ;
“ why did you not say so to catherine ?
till , at eight o’clock , i deemed it proper , though unsummoned , to carry a candle and his supper to him .
“ these are the earliest flowers at the heights , ” she exclaimed .
“ the young lady’s cousin , then ?
she cannot associate with him hereafter , and it is better for her to remain in ignorance of his proximity ;
“ i didn’t !
i repented having tried this second entrance , and was almost inclined to slip away before he finished cursing , but ere i could execute that intention , he ordered me in , and shut and re-fastened the door .
her life was useless .
it’s empty ;
and then he indulged in a soliloquy of execrations , and threats of what he would have done had the “ fiend ” deceived him .
make haste and get ready , now ;
one might doubt in seasons of cold reflection ;
” i cried , checking the exclamation risen to his lips at the sight which met him , and the bleak atmosphere of the chamber .
no one will thank you for a doze in such a den !
get up !
in full health and strength :
“ but i didn’t know that you wished to foster her fierce temper !
” retorted the angry boor , retreating , while his face burnt with mingled rage and mortification ;
he dared not speak to her there :
so gaumless ,’ as joseph calls it ?
i dare not tell !
you would love him without that , probably ;
you’re not much , are you , linton ?
commencing in strong feeling , and concluding in the affected , wordy style that a schoolboy might use to a fancied , incorporeal sweetheart .
she’ll snap at the master himself , and as good as dares him to thrash her ;
in all england , i do not believe that i could have fixed on a situation so completely removed from the stir of society .
“ i shall be glad to have a cup , ” i answered .
the conversation ceased .
and she she could not be called the opposite , yet she seemed to allow herself such wide latitude , that i had little faith in her principles , and still less sympathy for her feelings .
“ hathecliff has sent me for his lad , and i munn’t goa back ’bout him .
“ mistress dean ?
“ shut the window , ellen !
and yet , as is usually the case in a coal-district , a fine red fire illumined the chimney :
“ my name is hareton earnshaw , ” growled the other ;
so much the worse for me that i am strong .
we all kept as mute as mice a full half-hour , and should have done so longer , only joseph , having finished his chapter , got up and said that he must rouse the master for prayers and bed .
i’d not take linton by surprise with it .
“ what will she do ?
i watched her go to the door , on the arrival of a certain little boy ;
” she added petulantly , jerking her head away from my hands , “ you’ve combed my hair quite out of curl !
i wonder edgar did not send for a constable , and give him into custody !
it was kindness for him which induced me to bear it alone :
my young mistress alighted , and told me that , as she was resolved to stay a very little while , i had better hold the pony and remain on horseback ;
after a pause and a prolonged gaze , she resumed ;
it is not i who will make him hateful to you it is his own sweet spirit .
” i asked , approaching and putting my arm over her shoulder .
i’ll go to bed , ” i interrupted again .
i saw she was sorry for his persevering sulkiness and indolence :
he descended , and bidding the servants wait in the passage , went , followed by me , to the kitchen .
“ i guessed he uttered those words , at least , though his voice was hardly intelligible .
“ oh , you see , nelly , he would not relent a moment to keep me out of the grave .
” he cried , in strange perplexity .
i had begun to wipe the plate , and tidy some drawers at the far end in the dresser .
“ there’s nothing the matter but laziness ;
meantime , he wished him to continue writing at intervals , and engaged to give him what advice and comfort he was able by letter ;
whereupon mr edgar was taken with a nervous trembling , and his countenance grew deadly pale .
“ resign her to god as it is , sir , ” i answered , “ and if we should lose you which may he forbid under his providence , i’ll stand her friend and counsellor to the last .
and i unwillingly donned a cloak , and took my umbrella to accompany her on a stroll to the bottom of the park :
i can detain you both , quite concealed , here .
she certainly seemed in no laughing predicament :
“ let me in by the kitchen door ,’ he said .
do point out some landmarks by which i may know my way home :
and his face looked swelled and furious .
at the carrying of the last sheaves they stayed till dusk , and the evening happening to be chill and damp , my master caught a bad cold , that settled obstinately on his lungs , and confined him indoors throughout the whole of the winter , nearly without intermission .
her countenance grew wan with watching and sorrow , and my master gladly dismissed her to what he flattered himself would be a happy change of scene and society ;
cathy sat up late , having a world of things to order for the reception of her new friends :
he drove him from their company to the servants , deprived him of the instructions of the curate , and insisted that he should labour out of doors instead ;
nor was he daunted by the saucy style in which she jerked the page from his finger :
but they had not rested five minutes when a glare of white letters started from the dark , as vivid as spectres the air swarmed with catherines ;
“ no , no , i’ll allow nothing of the sort !
i knocked over hareton , who was hanging a litter of puppies from a chair-back in the doorway ;
“ begone !
the crags lie about a mile and a half beyond mr heathcliff’s place , and that is four from the grange , so i began to fear night would fall ere i could reach them .
all had been extinguished long ago :
but , for all that , i was not going to sympathise with him the brute beast !
“ get done , and begone !
and edgar linton , little interested at the commencement , spoke no more of interfering .
i might just as well talk of loving the miller who comes once a year to buy our corn .
she thought that some of them had been laying violent hands on me ;
i hate them .
where a colony of moor-game are settled :
hardened , perhaps , to ill-treatment :
i only speak from hearsay ;
i perceived he was very sensitive to suspected slights , and had obviously a dim notion of his inferiority .
i told him the cause of my staying up so late that he had the key of our room in his pocket .
he leant on the back of a chair , and covered his face .
in winter nothing more dreary , in summer nothing more divine , than those glens shut in by hills , and those bluff , bold swells of heath .
the letter was finished and forwarded to its destination by a milk-fetcher who came from the village ;
i departed to my own room , marvelling that i had escaped so easily .
“ but how can one little note ?
“ do you intend parting with the little ones , madam ?
” cried a peevish voice , simultaneously with me , from the inner room .
leaving us as we had been prior to his advent .
“ is he come back , then ?
she’s as poor as you or i :
and ended by hoping that he would follow mr linton’s example and avoid future interference with his family , for good or evil .
you look like a lady now .
you’ve done extremely wrong !
her figure was both plump and slender , elastic as steel , and her whole aspect sparkling with health and spirits .
“ quite possible that your master should have nothing but common humanity and a sense of duty to fall back upon .
they did not suffer him to come forth .
“ he told me to begone as fast as i could , ” she answered .
“ listen to that child !
“ there you differ with me , miss cathy , ” i remarked ;
they call it here “ the house ” pre-eminently .
catherine evinced a child’s annoyance at this neglect ;
“ of course , ” replied the uncle , with a hardly suppressed grimace , resulting from his deep aversion to both the proposed visitors .
“ he swore at us , and left linton no time to answer , nearly throwing him into the kitchen ;
the “ rahm ” was a kind of lumber-hole smelling strong of malt and grain ;
the adjective our gave mortal offence .
no , she turned up her nose at my civility .
but at the bottom was dotted in with pencil an obscure apology , and an entreaty for kind remembrance and reconciliation , if her proceeding had offended him :
i don’t pretend to be intimately acquainted with the mode of living customary in those days at wuthering heights :
“ sit down , sir , ” he said , at length .
“ the whole property is mortgaged , and the sole chance for the natural heir is to allow him an opportunity of creating some interest in the creditor’s heart , that he may be inclined to deal leniently towards him .
“ isabella and edgar linton talked of calling this afternoon , ” she said , at the conclusion of a minute’s silence .
“ you marry ?
well , he’ll wait a while yet .
sit you down , my good mistress , ” she replied ;
and what does not recall her ?
quick , ellen !
cathy rose .
“ i’ve tied his tongue , ” observed heathcliff .
and take a good look at that countenance :
“ i want to speak to him , and i must , before i go upstairs , ” she said .
“ let me go , if you want me to let you in !
she has thrown herself away upon that boor from sheer ignorance that better individuals existed !
he had no intention of hazarding a personal encounter .
unless she were more submissive to his directions than she had shown herself before .
make haste , and let me dress you smart before miss cathy comes out , and then you can sit together , with the whole hearth to yourselves , and have a long chatter till bedtime .
“ oh , well !
nelly , if it be not too late , as soon as i learn how he feels , i’ll choose between these two :
” he shouted .
if i may take the liberty to inquire .
“ oh , sir !
you should have spoken to edgar , indeed you should , and compelled him to leave me quiet !
i loved her long ago , and was wretched to lose her ;
resolving to take a whole bevy up to the heights , at daylight , and storm it literally , unless the prisoner were quietly surrendered to us .
so , crying out sharply , “ i’ll make the porridge !
“ i’ll have that lock mended , and you can escape by no way else .
and we’ll see if one tree won’t grow as crooked as another , with the same wind to twist it !
i’ll console mr edgar by acquainting him with the turn heathcliff’s humour has taken .
if we were neither of us cowards , we might combine to discharge it .
she never was in a consumption .
and , in the afternoon , i was busy getting up linen in the kitchen .
returning his angry glare , and meantime biting a piece of crust , the remnant of her breakfast .
mention of kenneth caused her to exclaim , instantly , that her health was perfect , and it was only catherine’s harshness which made her unhappy .
and i can tell you there is no chance of a change at present .
“ that is not true !
he’s exactly like the son of the fortune-teller that stole my tame pheasant .
can i trust your assertion , isabella ?
the fellow is as handsome a rustic as need be seen .
“ nay ;
flaxen ringlets , or rather golden , hanging loose on her delicate neck ;
the travelling is at an end , and you have nothing to do but rest and amuse yourself as you please .
who ever and anon interrupted her labour to pluck up the corner of her apron , and heave an indignant groan .
our young lady returned to us saucier and more passionate , and haughtier than ever .
the rest of them do earn their bread you live on my charity !
mr heathcliff was there laid on his back .
not re-appearing till the family were departed for church .
“ but what misery laid on heathcliff could content me , unless i have a hand in it ?
anybody will have it spontaneously at your service .
“ there you are , at your idle tricks again !
and hark you , heathcliff !
that entrance was fastened , and we heard him coming round to get in by the other .
but he was too timid in giving satisfactory reasons for his wish that she should shun connection with the household of the heights , and catherine liked good reasons for every restraint that harassed her petted will .
you needn’t make a secret of it :
“ delightful company !
” she cried at last .
a fine bundle of trash you study in your leisure hours , to be sure :
i want to know what i should do .
did master save you , mrs dean ?
nelly has played traitor , ” she exclaimed , passionately .
he wrote again to linton , expressing his great desire to see him ;
“ varrah weell !
he tears down my handiwork , boxes my ears , and croaks :
while he was speaking , joseph returned bearing a basin of milk-porridge , and placed it before linton :
damn thee , kiss me !
but one day , when she had been peculiarly wayward , rejecting her breakfast , complaining that the servants did not do what she told them ;
but i’m too mean for your anger .
as soon as i had perused this epistle i went to the master , and informed him that his sister had arrived at the heights , and sent me a letter expressing her sorrow for mrs linton’s situation , and her ardent desire to see him ;
it wounds her vanity to have the truth exposed .
i was in the condition of mind to be shocked at nothing :
not figuratively , but actually .
” said mr linton .
he only half addressed me , and i maintained silence .
perhaps i may manage to open it ;
“ i wer sure he’d sarve ye out !
my mother lived till eighty , a canty dame to the last .
the very exhibition of any desire to keep him would have rendered the claimant more peremptory :
” hindley threw it , hitting him on the breast , and down he fell , but staggered up immediately , breathless and white ;
i kissed hareton , said good-by ;
inform edgar that i’d give the world to see his face again that my heart returned to thrushcross grange in twenty-four hours after i left it , and is there at this moment , full of warm feelings for him , and catherine !
you’ll hit on exactly the most efficient method of revenging yourself on me .
well , you dropped linton with it into a slough of despond .
where i heard hareton sternly check his cousin , on her offering a revelation of her father-in-law’s conduct to his father .
he must get accustomed to him , and he may as well like him :
she was milking the cows in a shed behind the barn , and hurrying from her work , she inquired what there was to do ?
why are you so damp and pale , child ?
which was often interrupted from within by harsh words of scorn and intolerance , uttered in far from musical accents .
i dread sleeping :
his eye rapidly surveyed our faces .
am i to lose all , without a chance of retrieval ?
i listened at mr edgar’s door ;
little hareton was nearly five years old , and i had just begun to teach him his letters .
mr linton was not far behind ;
“ don’t alarm him more than necessary .
but she may come to the point as she will i sha’n’t help her !
“ but i did not expect him to be so silly .
hindley lifted her from her horse , exclaiming delightedly , “ why , cathy , you are quite a beauty !
i was out of patience with her folly !
what would he think ?
“ miss catherine , i’ll own to you that i have little patience with linton ;
catherine , released , put her two hands to her temples , and looked just as if she were not sure whether her ears were off or on .
hate my father , and spare me for contempt .
she came forward eagerly to greet me , and held out one hand to take the expected letter .
“ your brother is wondrous fond of you too , isn’t he ?
” she exclaimed , surprised at my earnestness .
you can feel in yourself it is impossible that a person should die for love of a stranger .
you can tell her to flit , when you go up ;
and his voice and greeting were as opposite as his aspect .
he had room in his heart only for two idols his wife and himself :
“ she has been dying for your sake several weeks , and raving about you this morning , and pouring forth a deluge of abuse , because i represented your failings in a plain light , for the purpose of mitigating her adoration .
he approached once more , and made as if he would seize the fragile being ;
when beneath its walls , i perceived decay had made progress , even in seven months :
how the devil could it be otherwise in her frightful isolation ?
we were reconciled ;
and on the tuesday , a little after dark , when my master , from sheer fatigue , had been compelled to retire a couple of hours , i went and opened one of the windows ;
everybody conjectured that i perished last night ;
you needn’t bespeak contempt , linton :
“ mr earnshaw ?
that seemed rather too favourable an arrangement to be hoped for ;
he has such an unhappy temper .
you don’t deserve this welcome .
speak to me .
the place was filled with sunshine , and the door stood wide open ;
“ he’s looking better these few days ;
and on the first occasion of my sitting up in the evening i asked catherine to read to me , because my eyes were weak .
i felt perplexed :
“ i’m not come too soon , am i ?
i’m starving !
“ who are you ?
i noticed on that occasion how much selfishness there is even in a love like mr linton’s , when he so regretted catherine’s blessed release !
“ at present , convey yourself and him away .
linton spent his days and nights there , a sleepless guardian ;
both of us were able to look in by standing on the basement , and clinging to the ledge , and we saw ah !
from mr earnshaw and his companions she kept aloof ;
the inclination is there , and his very weakness will sharpen his wits to find a substitute for strength .
“ nay , ” cried he , and retired , regardless of any prayers i could pour forth to detain him .
i let him enjoy the luxury unannoyed ;
but i own i should love well to bring her pride a peg lower .
“ yes , i hear him trying to spell and read to himself , and pretty blunders he makes !
“ then you believe i care more for my own feelings than yours , cathy ?
indeed , its face looked older than catherine’s ;
“ that’s good news .
because i put slight faith in his own affirmation .
and i’ve no power to be merry to-night .
did you notice his language , linton ?
“ let me go to bed , then , ” answered the boy , shrinking from catherine’s salute ;
an inefficient substitute ;
why did you betray your own heart , cathy ?
so he offered , if i would lend him books out of the library , to do what i wished :
you inquire after my health it is better ;
“ i had the misfortune to scream in my sleep , owing to a frightful nightmare .
not a morsel , i thought , surveying with regret the white complexion and slim frame of my companion , and his large languid eyes his mother’s eyes , save that , unless a morbid touchiness kindled them a moment , they had not a vestige of her sparkling spirit .
as we walked home , i would fain have enlightened my charge on the characters of the people we had quitted :
and said he should not notice his atrocious conduct further , but advised him to get to bed .
but mr heathcliff would as soon permit that as he would set up hareton in an independent house ;
still it became in a manner necessary ;
i began to defend myself , thinking it too bad to be blamed for another’s wicked waywardness .
there was the will , however , to hinder that , and my loud protestations against any infringement of its directions .
“ i’ve been so far forbearing with you , sir , ” he said quietly ;
hathecliff maks noa ’count o’ t’ mother , nor ye norther ;
where does he live ?
” cried the other .
she snatched at the instrument , and half succeeded in getting it out of his loosened fingers :
and there was double cause to desire it , for on her existence depended that of another :
he got through , and the doctor affirmed it was in a great measure owing to me , and praised me for my care .
“ i shall have naught to do wi’ you and your mucky pride , and your damned mocking tricks !
and i cannot say why , but all at once a gush of child’s sensations flowed into my heart .
that capacity for intense attachments reminded me of her mother :
i bestowed little attention on her proceedings , but , presently , i heard her begin “ i’ve found out , hareton , that i want that i’m glad that i should like you to be my cousin now , if you had not grown so cross to me , and so rough .
other parts took the form of a regular diary , scrawled in an unformed , childish hand .
“ silence !
he replied in a jargon i did not comprehend .
catherine was waxing cross at this ;
“ i’ll see thee damned before i be thy servant !
and i stand between him and bodily harm .
but , perhaps , i shouldn’t say .
take my books away , and i should be desperate !
for the journey had fatigued him .
and the master called to me to see what was the matter , and inform them that he wouldn’t have that noise repeated .
she said nothing further till the paroxysm was over ;
“ it will certainly annoy mr heathcliff , and he’ll be mad at you both .
she ate and drank eagerly , and sank back on her pillow again , clenching her hands and groaning .
” she replied , peremptorily .
“ it isn’t :
had you been brought up in his circumstances , would you be less rude ?
and though i humour both , i think a smart chastisement might improve them all the same .
he is not altogether guiltless in this illness of mine ;
she ran into her chamber , and made me come with her , though i should have been dressing the children :
“ hush , my darling !
i overheard no further distinguishable talk , but , on looking round again , i perceived two such radiant countenances bent over the page of the accepted book , that i did not doubt the treaty had been ratified on both sides ;
i’d join him .
“ that’s too high , ” murmured the provoking thing .
that was worse :
one day , as she inspected this drawer , i observed that the playthings and trinkets which recently formed its contents were transmuted into bits of folded paper .
when i went from home i hastened to return ;
he seemed as awkward and rough as ever .
he was as quick and as intelligent a child as ever you were ;
“ are you possessed with a devil , ” he pursued , savagely , “ to talk in that manner to me when you are dying ?
“ mrs linton , recalling old times , would have me give you a cordial reception ;
however , he felt that his will had better be altered :
“ and mr heathcliff never reads ;
he is in bed , and too tired to go the distance now .
cheer up !
his hair and clothes were whitened with snow , and his sharp cannibal teeth , revealed by cold and wrath , gleamed through the dark .
and called for zillah , as loud as i could .
he returned after midnight , and , instead of going to bed , shut himself into the room beneath .
but they had evidently experienced rough usage :
wisht , wisht ;
he had a terror of earnshaw’s reputation , and shrunk from encountering him ;
she had cried out , when i carried up her dinner , that she couldn’t bear any longer being in the cold ;
and those at wuthering heights were never visible still she asserted she caught their shining .
i rose with an irrepressible expression of what i felt on my lips , which induced my companion , who had been staring towards the door , to turn and look at me .
he attempted to rise , but she seized his hair , and kept him down .
the spirit which served her was growing intractable :
“ i hope it will be a lesson to you to make no more rash journeys on these hills , ” cried heathcliff’s stern voice from the kitchen entrance .
i stepped over the threshold to wait till the others should enter .
and only last summer i proved myself perfectly unworthy of one .
“ oh , god confound you , mr lockwood !
i don’t remember another that i can at all compare with it since i was capable of suffering .
yet , notwithstanding , evidence of a wealthy soil , that might yield luxuriant crops under other and favourable circumstances .
every one was active but miss isabella ;
at wuthering heights it always sounded on quiet days following a great thaw or a season of steady rain .
employing art , not force :
﻿1801 i have just returned from a visit to my landlord the solitary neighbour that i shall be troubled with .
i saw nothing for it but to hold my tongue , and suffer matters to take their course ;
why shouldn’t you suffer ?
there was no running or bounding now , though the chill wind might well have tempted her to race .
he shrank forebodingly from the idea of committing isabella to its keeping .
a capital fellow !
he allowed that the lad was ruined :
if you be , i’m certain one thing is not stronger your regard for me :
and he had earthly consolation and affections also .
i should feel well but ,’ she continued , with a bitterness she couldn’t conceal , you have left me so long to struggle against death alone , that i feel and see only death !
it barely left me sense to try to escape from him and his voice .
though i hate him as much as ever , he did me a good turn a short time since that will make my conscience tender of breaking his neck .
in fact , i was as reckless as some malefactors show themselves at the foot of the gallows .
and though i couldn’t , and cannot help showing my nature to you , i regret it and repent it ;
one for your master and miss isabella , being gentry ;
“ but is she very ill ?
pray don’t begin to dispute with him .
“ papa is gone to fetch my cousin from london :
you have little taste for my diversions now :
there was another rapid glance at the house , and supposing himself unseen , the scoundrel had the impudence to embrace her .
” exclaimed heathcliff ;
i declined ;
it is a moral teething ;
i had half a mind to spend it by my study fire , instead of wading through heath and mud to wuthering heights .
and he’ll be my ruin .
we are all done for master , mistress , and servant .
but she only glared about her for an instant , and then rushed from the room .
he coloured deeper , with a different feeling , muttered an oath , and turned away .
let him be quiet this evening , at least , will you ?
he did not raise his to her often :
“ i did nothing deliberately .
heathcliff knew he could plead eloquently for catherine’s company , then .
four had been provided , and a gallon pitcher of new milk was brought from the dairy , which hareton seized and commenced drinking and spilling from the expansive lip .
her accomplice suffered for his share in the escape , notwithstanding his timid contrivances .
do let me feel it it comes straight down the moor do let me have one breath !
it is green , ” i said , recollecting myself “ only green , ” and i went on , intending to send somebody else to open it ;
is there , earnshaw ?
he advanced hastily to the entrance , where i made way for him to pass .
she was the most winning thing that ever brought sunshine into a desolate house :
that is , when you call to see me ;
i’ve marked every day .
“ hindley hurried up from his paradise on the hearth , and seizing one of us by the collar , and the other by the arm , hurled both into the back-kitchen ;
“ bad !
she put up her hand to clasp his neck , and bring her cheek to his as he held her ;
my master kept his room ;
and brought to my recollection her former illness , and the doctor’s injunction that she should not be crossed .
and i bit my lip in spite , at having thrown away the chance i might have had of doing something besides staring at its smiting beauty .
“ mrs heathcliff , your wife , i mean .
“ joseph !
“ ay !
and i shall tell him all about you !
i do !
and then i remembered mr edgar’s stern rebuke of my carrying tales ;
and i’m conscious it’s night , and there are two candles on the table making the black press shine like jet .
“ you scandalous old hypocrite !
i rather think his appearance there was distasteful to catherine ;
i got together good store of dainties , and slung them in a basket on one side of the saddle ;
she would have scorned to do it , if she had been spitted on the horns of a mad cow .
“ yes , my angel , he is , god be thanked , you are safe with us again !
“ nothing only look at the almanack on that wall ;
i imagined her as little likely to die as myself .
weep away .
“ you forget you have a master here ,’ says the tyrant .
though she disputed the act at first evidently ;
ah !
” sobbed she , instantly checked .
he had a “ queer ” end , as she expressed it .
“ you think not ?
the remainder of the letter is for yourself alone .
she is better acquainted with his heart than i , or any one besides ;
and if not , is he a devil ?
and move , or i’ll kick you !
and as yah’re in at one door , he’s out at t’other ;
i told him as much as i thought proper of her illness , and he extorted from me , by cross-examination , most of the facts connected with its origin .
i let him know that his cousin would very likely sit with us , and she had been always used to see the sabbath respected ;
hareton and joseph were probably fast asleep in bed .
“ can i stay after you have struck me ?
the company of a child of his own age will instil new spirit into him soon , and by wishing for strength he’ll gain it .
you’ll be able to tell his uncle fine tales of his kindness , when you get home again , i assure you .
he put out his hand and stroked one curl , as gently as if it were a bird .
i reached this book , and a pot of ink from a shelf , and pushed the house-door ajar to give me light , and i have got the time on with writing for twenty minutes ;
only it will let you know why , with a reluctance to be always alone , his society is no benefit ;
i’m so wretched , you can’t help being sorry and pitying me .
” i removed the vessel out of his reach , and proceeded to take off my hat and riding-habit .
and how the blacksmith’s lass had got up to spy who they were :
my master requested an account of our ongoings .
he was so obstinate in his resolution , that heathcliff deemed it expedient to compel from my lips a recapitulation of what had taken place ;
i shall only have the more humour for you .
“ give over with that baby-work !
he answered in his vulgar accent , it wouldn’t do mitch hurt if it did ;’ and surveyed its legs with a smile .
and thrust back his chair ;
he swerved aside , and attempted to pass .
the sea could be as readily contained in that horse-trough as her whole affection be monopolised by him .
had it been dark , i daresay he would have tried to remedy the mistake by smashing hareton’s skull on the steps ;
that i keep strictly within the limits of the law .
mr linton had given her leave , if we went only a short distance and were back within the hour .
it blew bleak as winter all round was solitary .
“ i will have one , you cruel wretch !
she either did not hear or did not regard , for she still sprang on , and i was compelled to follow .
“ and nowhere else ?
he could not summon courage , at first , to utter a syllable in reply to her questioning look , and her murmured petition .
“ oh !
” he said , shuddering .
though hardness , not gentleness , made him give little trouble .
” she replied , “ i don’t wish to limit his acquirements :
the frock was of light silk , and clung to her with wet , and her feet were protected merely by thin slippers ;
“ i care for nothing in comparison with papa .
“ how long is it since i shut myself in here ?
” and while i was , half-consciously , worrying my brain to guess what jabez branderham would make of his subject , i sank back in bed , and fell asleep .
i believe the master would relish earnshaw’s thrashing him to a mummy , if he were not his son ;
my poor little sister-in-law is breaking her heart by mere contemplation of your physical and moral beauty .
with these words she suddenly splashed a pint of icy water down my neck , and pulled me into the kitchen .
heathcliff held both bridles as they rode on , and they set their faces from the village , and went as fast as the rough roads would let them .
to my joy , he left us , after giving this judicious counsel , and hindley stretched himself on the hearthstone .
i have it carefully preserved in a little glass box ;
thear , agean !
“ she didn’t leave him , ” said the boy ;
“ you look as dismal as a drowned whelp .
i wouldn’t have aided or abetted an attempt on even his life for anything .
mr green took upon himself to order everything and everybody about the place .
un’ if yah dunnut loike maister , there’s us .
and averred that the stab of a knife could not inflict a worse pang than he suffered at seeing his lady vexed .
because the gates were generally locked , and i thought she would scarcely venture forth alone , if they had stood wide open .
he added , however , “ if i can get him ” ;
” “ don’t cant , nelly , ” he said :
there were no mutual concessions :
i’ve just seen him .
when company are in the house , servants don’t commence scouring and cleaning in the room where they are !
next day it all came out , sadly to my chagrin ;
hareton was anxious to enter ;
“ yesterday , ” sobbed isabella , “ and now !
joseph had advanced through the kitchen as i uttered these words , and now presented himself in the hall .
i own i did not like her , after infancy was past ;
“ then i hope his ghost will haunt you ;
his emotion was only revealed by the immense sighs he drew , as he solemnly spread his large bible on the table , and overlaid it with dirty bank-notes from his pocket-book , the produce of the day’s transactions .
where is she ?
“ you asked , what has driven me to flight at last ?
” she asked , suddenly reviving .
” i cried hurriedly .
but then they are so soft and mellow :
“ none for my friend , ” she replied :
scoundrel !
” i said :
” he asked .
it was done ;
quite a christian :
“ take you with her , pitiful changeling !
by god , as if i would rear such a monster !
except where he was born , and who were his parents , and how he got his money at first .
and when i attempted to call them , she pulled me back , slammed the door to , and locked it .
about seven days ago he sent me a brace of grouse the last of the season .
the fiend which usually looked out , however , was so dimmed and drowned that i did not fear to hazard another sound of derision .
so intimate to your master that i must supply the place of this with my own , if he attempt to remove it .
and there i remained enclosed the whole day , and the whole of the next night ;
and then he seemed to smile .
and both times he pretended to be quite knocked up for three or four days afterwards .
and you were kidnapped by wicked sailors and brought to england .
and , said he “ as we shall now have no influence over his destiny , good or bad , you must say nothing of where he is gone to my daughter :
“ i know why hareton never speaks , when i am in the kitchen , ” she exclaimed , on another occasion .
cannot you tell her whom i am , eh , joseph ?
the boy was fully occupied with his own cogitations for the remainder of the ride , till we halted before the farmhouse garden-gate .
at that moment the garden gate swung to ;
i concealed the fact of his having swallowed nothing for four days , fearing it might lead to trouble , and then , i am persuaded , he did not abstain on purpose :
but there he was , powerless under its gripe , and any addition seemed capable of shocking him into idiocy .
i fancy it knew me :
inquiries were made as to how it got there ;
“ black hair and eyes !
for when i regarded him alone , it seemed exactly that he gazed at something within two yards’ distance .
an unexpected aid presently appeared in the shape of throttler , whom i now recognised as a son of our old skulker :
and then i set myself to reflect how i had tended him in infancy , and watched him grow to youth , and followed him almost through his whole course ;
she has disturbed me , night and day , through eighteen years incessantly remorselessly till yesternight ;
he did not make a single inquiry further , or mention her in any way , except directing me to send what property she had in the house to her fresh home , wherever it was , when i knew it .
off with her !
“ but he looked better when he was animated ;
a half-civilised ferocity lurked yet in the depressed brows and eyes full of black fire , but it was subdued ;
” interposed linton , greatly shocked at the double fault of falsehood and violence which his idol had committed .
” i thought to myself .
probably the scene i witnessed was a repetition of others acted during the night .
” she went on to herself .
heathcliff had not the habit of bestowing a single unnecessary civility on miss linton , i knew .
” replied catherine , striking one hand on her forehead , and the other on her breast :
“ what is it to you ?
“ it is not , ” retorted she ;
there was nothing else to produce such humiliation .
yet why he did not wait till his decease was a puzzle to my master , because ignorant how nearly he and his nephew would quit the world together .
and yet the deepened attraction is not entirely owing to the situation of the looker-on .
in truth , i felt rather disposed to defer the sequel of her narrative myself .
mr heathcliff said he did not perceive that i was wanted ;
but , at last , i think she begins to know me :
“ he’ll not venture a single syllable all the time !
my companion waxed serious at hearing this speech .
linton had certainly behaved provokingly :
she was dressed in the girlish dress she commonly wore , befitting her age more than her position :
” i interrupted .
they often rode to church in winter .
how changed i found him , even in those few days !
i suggested boiled milk or tea ;
“ i hate you to be fidgeting in my presence , ” exclaimed the young lady imperiously , not allowing her guest time to speak :
linton slowly trailed himself off , and lay down .
for heaven’s sake , catherine , don’t look so angry !
and i promised .
and told how i saw him quit the kitchen just as she complained of her brother’s conduct regarding him .
catherine’s cup was never filled :
you’re no weakling :
“ you are very stiff , ” said heathcliff , “ i know that :
my mind was never in a holier frame than while i gazed on that untroubled image of divine rest .
now , i have the satisfaction of being sure that he detests me , to the point of its annoying him seriously to have me within ear-shot or eyesight :
” muttered the young man , reproachfully ;
i could gather , however , that her guide had been a favourite till she hurt his feelings by addressing him as a servant ;
his eyes were fixed on the red embers of the fire , the brows not contracted , but raised next the temples ;
he , poor man , was perfectly aghast at the spectacle of catherine seated on the same bench with hareton earnshaw , leaning her hand on his shoulder ;
still , i involuntarily obeyed him , as if i was not quite sure .
the mistress visited her often in the interval , and commenced her plan of reform by trying to raise her self-respect with fine clothes and flattery , which she took readily ;
making love in play , eh ?
nobody loves you nobody will cry for you when you die !
and , though kenneth remarked that what he saved from the grave would only recompense his care by forming the source of constant future anxiety in fact , that his health and strength were being sacrificed to preserve a mere ruin of humanity he knew no limits in gratitude and joy when catherine’s life was declared out of danger ;
“ mrs dean , go away .
somebody pushed it open , with a vigorous hand , and a light glimmered through the squares at the top of the bed .
“ here , ” he said , “ into the parlour ?
” and he turned his face on to his arm , and shut his eyes again .
“ but stay , ” he continued , turning towards the young lady .
he signed her to precede him ;
” sang linton , sinking into the recess of his chair , and leaning back his head to enjoy the agitation of the other disputant , who stood behind .
my slumber was deep and sweet , though over far too soon .
” observed heathcliff , scornfully .
and she had a small drawer in a cabinet in the library , which she would trifle over for hours , and whose key she took special care to remove when she left it .
five nights and four days i remained , altogether , seeing nobody but hareton once every morning ;
“ softly , miss , ” answered the addressed .
and eating once in twenty-four hours seemed sufficient sustenance for him .
put him in the cellar , papa .
she’s my wife , and it’s shameful that she should wish to leave me .
this was zillah , the stout housewife ;
for listen , miss , and mind , i’ll keep my word , if you attempt going to wuthering heights again , with or without me , i shall inform mr linton , and , unless he allow it , the intimacy with your cousin must not be revived .
and while he lay at the worst he would have me constantly by his pillow :
another encounter between you and the master would kill her altogether .
catherine looked up , and instinctively raised her hand to her cheek :
“ i think you belie her , ” said heathcliff , twisting his chair to face them .
“ half an hour ?
“ but i’m going to set ’em again .
it was deep and tender .
too cautiously to betray his presence by the slightest noise .
but her own quick spirit refused to delude her :
“ get up , wretched idiot , before i stamp you to death !’ he cried , making a movement that caused me to make one also .
“ and he must bide the consequences of neglecting my warning !
you’ll have to fetch the key , or else i must run round to the porter’s lodge .
each had enough decorum to suspend further hostilities :
earnshaw was there also , but he quitted the room directly .
perhaps , he’s gone .
her black eyes flashing with passion and resolution .
almost too much so to enjoy the cheerful fire and smoking coffee which the servant had prepared for my refreshment .
we made ourselves as snug as our means allowed in the arch of the dresser .
“ no , she would not , ” he said .
old mrs linton paid us several visits , to be sure , and set things to rights , and scolded and ordered us all ;
what in the world led you wandering to thrushcross grange ?
with hareton the resemblance is carried farther :
“ cathy , do come .
a circumstance observed by me when awake , but forgotten .
but you won’t pity hers !
“ get away this moment !
when i refused to go , and when she found her entreaties did not move me , she went lamenting to her husband and brother .
at this point of the housekeeper’s story she chanced to glance towards the time-piece over the chimney ;
but then he reflected that heathcliff must answer for it .
he fair likes he langs to set his brazened face agean ’em !
is papa alive ?
it began oddly .
i started :
for a second journey would make us better judges .
“ hareton and i are friends now ;
i wish you could dismiss that apathy out of that countenance , and look rather more anxious about me .
“ come , then , ” he whispered earnestly .
but never mind !
” said the unmannerly wretch .
“ well , yes oh , you would intimate that her spirit has taken the post of ministering angel , and guards the fortunes of wuthering heights , even when her body is gone .
and now i’ll cry i’ll cry myself sick !
you are habituated to his baseness , and , perhaps , imagine i can get used to it too !
but the master retired early , and i generally needed nothing after six o’clock , thus the evening was her own .
” he replied , pulling from his waistcoat a curiously-constructed pistol , having a double-edged spring knife attached to the barrel .
“ i don’t much mind speaking of his amiable qualities now , ” he answered ;
“ so much the better .
the travelling carriage rolled in sight .
” i entreated .
“ mr linton should approve , ” returned my lady , decisively .
and i noticed another , by the aid of my nostrils ;
“ stop , miss catherine , dear !
but he seemed to recollect himself presently , and smothered the storm in a brutal curse , muttered on my behalf :
we parted unreconciled , you remember , and i sha’n’t forgive myself .
at first she gave him no glance of recognition :
it was very , very sad :
for linton’s letters bore few or no indications of his defective character .
there seldom passed much talk between them :
and caught me in the act of stowing his son away in the kitchen cupboard .
his lawyer had been earnshaw’s also :
my housekeeper entreated me to bear a little note from her to her young lady , and i did not refuse , for the worthy woman was not conscious of anything odd in her request .
heathcliff was hard to discover , at first .
this news filled me with fresh fears ;
do try to behave like a gentleman , now do !
bud he’ll not be soa allus yah’s see , all on ye !
having gathered venom with reflection .
joseph and i were the only two that would stay .
“ i might as well have struggled with a bear , or reasoned with a lunatic .
” i replied .
he never enters the parlour , and should linton show those ways in the house where he is , he sends him upstairs directly .
“ well , mrs dean , it will be a charitable deed to tell me something of my neighbours :
there you experience the consequence of scorning book-larning ,’ as you would say .
how can she love in him what he has not ?
“ go to the sofa , then , and ellen shall bring you some tea , ” answered his uncle patiently .
“ ellen , how long will it be before i can walk to the top of those hills ?
will you clamber up , and pluck it to show to papa ?
mr linton , i’m mortally sorry that you are not worth knocking down !
“ here’s to its hearty damnation !
“ my amiable lady !
” he returned , dismounting , and slinging his bridle on a hook by the door .
for he takes a pride in his brutishness .
and as she would not drink , i sprinkled it on her face .
“ she did , ” cried my young lady .
in passing the garden to reach the road , at a place where a bridle hook is driven into the wall , i saw something white moved irregularly , evidently by another agent than the wind .
” i thought .
and how the devil did you come to fasten me out , you toothless hound ?
but she uttered falsehoods , didn’t she ?
“ you won’t go to-morrow , recollect , miss !
besides , i could spare a day easily to arrange matters with my landlord , and thus save myself the trouble of invading the neighbourhood again .
and can you compare my feelings respecting catherine to his ?
“ ah , certainly i see now :
he was there at least , a few yards further in the park ;
her eye , long stranger to any gleam of pleasure , caught them in waking , and shone delighted as she gathered them eagerly together .
“ no don’t kiss me :
it’s surely no great cause of alarm that heathcliff should take a moonlight saunter on the moors , or even lie too sulky to speak to us in the hay-loft .
” i retorted .
living among clowns and misanthropists , she probably cannot appreciate a better class of people when she meets them .
but that could not last :
he jumped at the fruit ;
but as the prisoner had never broken his fast since yesterday’s dinner , i would wink at his cheating mr hindley that once .
and i shunned going out , because i still carried his letter in my pocket , and didn’t want to be threatened or teased any more .
i cannot live without my soul !
” exclaimed joseph .
there was no misdoubting by their expression the full success of her partner’s endeavours to make himself detested .
if anything , it expressed a flinty gratification at a piece of difficult work successfully executed .
” he interrupted , with an almost diabolical sneer on his face .
and , seemingly , i must not eat .
in winter the frost is always there before it comes to us ;
” and the old sinner grinned in mockery .
“ not for one minute , ” she replied .
soon perceiving that her report was true , and , moreover , that i had almost upset her wits by my unwelcome apparition , i bade her be composed .
“ when i wish to speak to you i’ll come here .
i shall join you directly .
he blackened and scowled like a thunder-cloud , and kept his fists resolutely clenched , and his gaze fixed on the ground .
mim !
she averted her face :
i dreamt i was sleeping the last sleep by that sleeper , with my heart stopped and my cheek frozen against hers .
and joseph , whom i followed to the stables , and requested to accompany me in , after staring and muttering to himself , screwed up his nose and replied “ mim !
“ oh , wicked , wicked !
i suppose we shall have plenty of lamentations now i see we shall but they can’t keep me from my narrow home out yonder :
catherine used to boast that she stood between you and bodily harm :
“ they remind me of soft thaw winds , and warm sunshine , and nearly melted snow .
edgar had made a slop in his saucer , and scarcely swallowed a mouthful .
i don’t care how long i wait , if i can only do it at last .
for she never endeavoured to divert herself with reading , or occupation of any kind , and he would spend many an hour in trying to entice her attention to some subject which had formerly been her amusement .
“ i sud more likker look for th’ horse , ” he replied .
“ good-bye .
linton sank back on his pillow and fell into a brown study .
he grew pale with pure annoyance :
you’re not fit to be your own guardian , isabella , now ;
just imagine your father in my place , and linton in yours ;
” she exclaimed .
old mr and mrs linton were not there ;
i cannot resist going up with this every night , and trying his door .
“ i’d rayther , by th’ haulf , hev’ ’em swearing i’ my lugs fro’h morn to neeght , nor hearken ye hahsiver !
i have not one word of comfort .
but he and hareton are detestable companions .
“ i am come to see thy father , hareton , ” i added , guessing from the action that nelly , if she lived in his memory at all , was not recognised as one with me .
my history is dree , as we say , and will serve to while away another morning .
heathcliff’s face brightened a moment ;
they may reckon on that !
“ worthy mrs dean , i like you , but i don’t like your double-dealing , ” he added aloud .
now , i had a distinct view of her whole figure and countenance .
hareton , during the discussion , stood with his hands in his pockets , too awkward to speak ;
edgar persevered in his resolution as far as the court ;
” and her teeth chattered as she shrank closer to the almost extinguished embers .
“ i didn’t tell him that .
“ don’t provoke him against me , catherine , for he is very hard .
“ you recollect the two days we agreed to spend in the place and way each thought pleasantest ?
and finding that her nails made no impression , she applied her teeth pretty sharply .
and rather morose .
she stepped behind me and whispered crossly , “ take yourself and your dusters off ;
he has not , has he ?
edgar is restored from the ill-temper he gave way to at your coming ;
we had not yet lighted a candle , but all the apartment was visible , even to the portraits on the wall :
how am i to love papa ?
and before i came in sight of her again , she was two miles nearer wuthering heights than her own home ;
and they call the methodists’ or baptists’ place , i can’t say which it is , at gimmerton , a chapel .) “ joseph had gone , ” she continued , “ but i thought proper to bide at home .
be thankful it is nothing worse .
but you’ll see by his look that he has received his due !
and it partly contributes to render me regardless how he and his cousin go on together .
“ take warning and begone !
that is an improvement , i thought .
and , at first , i found plenty of entertainment in listening to the larks singing far and near , and enjoying the sweet , warm sunshine ;
they are , at present , marvellously so , however ;
go , say thy prayers , child , and ask god’s pardon .
but his face and throat were washed with rain ;
bonny bird ;
“ her affection for him was still the chief sentiment in her heart ;
“ if you had any real griefs you’d be ashamed to waste a tear on this little contrariety .
“ then you are not afraid of death ?
this caused me to feel , not uncomfortable , but rather fearful (as i am still) of serious effects from the incidents of to-day and yesterday .
he is somewhere out of hearing ;
at least , it was praiseworthy ambition for him to desire to be as accomplished as linton ;
once in a week perhaps .
“ ellen , are not you tired ?
though he was more taken up with staring at catherine than thinking of linton .
” and maintained its tenacious gripe , almost maddening me with fear .
he said he called to gather information concerning me from you , supposing you resided there still ;
“ oh !
or else that you are a wicked , unprincipled girl .
“ nobody coming here , i hope ?
there are worse men than he is yet !
her companion lingered very little behind her , and i was about to depart also , but he bid me sit still .
“ why , master linton , ” said i , “ three hundred miles is a great distance ;
perhaps she had no temptation to transgress .
” and we all , including the rustic youth , drew round the table :
miss cathy’s riven th’ back off “ th’ helmet o’ salvation , ” un’ heathcliff’s pawsed his fit into t’ first part o’ “ t’ brooad way to destruction !
before i arrived in sight of it , all that remained of day was a beamless amber light along the west :
he’s bitten and so is charlie .
he retreated out of arm’s length , and picked up a large flint .
that means naught .
no , ” she said , looking slowly round .
mustn’t he be made to do as i ask him ?
though what he grasps with one hand he flings away with the other .
“ something too horrible to live under a decent roof .
when i could get him to listen , i saw it pleased him that his sister had left her husband ;
her spirits were always at high-water mark , her tongue always going singing , laughing , and plaguing everybody who would not do the same .
on her seventeenth birthday , he did not visit the churchyard :
and being really fully as much inclined to laugh as scold for i esteemed it all girlish vanity i at length relented in a measure , and asked , “ if i consent to burn them , will you promise faithfully neither to send nor receive a letter again , nor a book (for i perceive you have sent him books) , nor locks of hair , nor rings , nor playthings ?
his cousin flew to him .
besides , i felt loth to yield the fellow further amusement at my expense ;
she was a happy creature , and an angel , in those days .
speak !
“ what do you say ?
i tell you , i have such faith in linton’s love , that i believe i might kill him , and he wouldn’t wish to retaliate .
“ isabella , let me in , or i’ll make you repent !’ he girned ,’ as joseph calls it .
i’ll go out of doors , or anywhere , rather than have your disagreeable voice in my ear !’ said my lady .
“ but when i look for his father in his face , i find her every day more !
there he is , ” cried heathcliff , sinking back into his seat .
and , as i rode on , the gloom cleared .
afterwards she turned , and recommenced her nonsense ;
let me alone , ” sobbed catherine .
you might be dumb , or a baby , for anything you say to amuse me , or for anything you do , either !
when , hearing a rustle among the ling , i looked up and saw mr heathcliff almost close upon us , descending the heights .
“ i don’t want your permission for that i shall marry him :
“ oh !
i began to nod drowsily over the dim page :
i went at five o’clock , and walked ;
he grew sullen , and began to swear .
the crown of all my wishes will be the union of those two .
my confessions have not relieved me ;
“ you see , sir , i am come , according to promise !
“ she is alive and well ;
i just hope , i pray , that he may forget his diabolical prudence and kill me !
he dried his eyes , and lightened into a faint smile .
regardless of joseph’s affirmations that he considered the merry tunes i chose as next door to songs .
go , and say some person from gimmerton desires to see her .
“ why , ma’am , ” i answered , “ the master has no idea of your being deranged ;
it turned out afterwards that he only got as far as the other side the settle , when he flung himself on a bench by the wall , removed from the fire , and remained silent .
” and here he lamented outright ;
and had he been unrestrained , would probably have spoiled all by filling his epistles with complaints and lamentations :
“ where must we go ?’ i asked of my cousin , disregarding the old wretch’s mockery .
i’ll either break or burn a way out of the house .
he trembled , and his face glowed :
“ silence !
” she panted , and her face grew red with passion .
having succeeded in obtaining entrance with another key , i ran to unclose the panels , for the chamber was vacant ;
don’t you ?
“ it is hard to forgive , and to look at those eyes , and feel those wasted hands , ” he answered .
and she shall have you !
not a light gleamed from any house , far or near ;
beginning to perceive that it would be foolish to sit sulking for the misbehaviour of a pack of curs ;
for no mortal creature .
“ well , i told him to beware , ” said my companion ;
“ that’s a turkey’s , ” she murmured to herself ;
his sorrow was of that kind that will not lament .
i felt interested in a man who seemed more exaggeratedly reserved than myself .
and often , if i came near her suddenly while reading , she would start and bend over the book , evidently desirous to hide it ;
“ cannot ate it ?
go with mrs dean , and keep with her ;
the fourth was sunday , and i brought it into her room after the family were gone to church .
the chairs were also damaged , many of them severely ;
did anybody ever hear the like !
i thought her conduct odd ;
“ i shall not be at peace , ” moaned catherine , recalled to a sense of physical weakness by the violent , unequal throbbing of her heart , which beat visibly and audibly under this excess of agitation .
i wish to stay all night .
the poor creature was threatened , or coaxed , into that act during her week’s absence , when his uncle died .
are you going upstairs ?
it drew him forth sooner than i expected .
i’m really extremely angry ;
“ and she got a chair for herself , and placed it at a distance from both of us .
my human fixture and her satellites rushed to welcome me ;
” she pursued , kneeling down by me , and lifting her winsome eyes to my face with that sort of look which turns off bad temper , even when one has all the right in the world to indulge it .
and mr earnshaw agreed , though with a heavy spirit , for he said “ hindley was nought , and would never thrive as where he wandered .
i listened to detect a woman’s voice in the house , and filled the interim with wild regrets and dismal anticipations , which , at last , spoke audibly in irrepressible sighing and weeping .
i ran errands too , and helped to make hay , and hung about the farm ready for anything that anybody would set me to .
as soon as ever i had barred the door , utter blackness overwhelmed me , and i fell on the floor .
indeed , i don’t believe she has ever breathed a syllable , in the latter’s hearing , against her oppressor since .
if i let you alone for half a day , won’t you come sighing and wheedling to me again ?
i have not had a glimpse of one for weeks .
gained the admiration of isabella , and the heart and soul of her brother :
“ no , no ;
nobody , neither hareton nor zillah , is to know .
for the library , where her father stopped a short time daily the brief period he could bear to sit up and his chamber , had become her whole world .
you shall do that .
they could not every day sit so grim and taciturn ;
will you be happy when i am in the earth ?
i see this house will never do for me look at t’ poor lad , he’s fair choking !
after she died , the master retained me for his housekeeper .
she would admit none of us till this evening , and so we couldn’t inform you of her state , as we were not aware of it ourselves ;
i , supposing she was going to say something , looked up .
i shook my head , and went meditating into the house .
and how to soften his refusal of even a few lines to console isabella .
linton !
i went , at the earliest opportunity , and besought him to depart ;
” i reflected , while riding down the road .
yesterday afternoon set in misty and cold .
they both promised fair to grow up as rude as savages ;
joseph and i joined at an unsociable meal , seasoned with reproofs on one side and sauciness on the other .
i did not know whether to resent this language or pursue my explanation ;
pray , come and persuade her to go to bed .
“ you may be right , ellen , ” she answered ;
“ who ?
but cathy affirmed they did , and , in her wisdom , instanced his own father’s aversion to her aunt .
linton sat in the great arm-chair half asleep ;
“ your mother hated your father :
but he’s better , very likely .
exchanging saddles and all , and then sitting down on a bundle of hay to overcome the qualm which the violent blow occasioned , before he entered the house .
and i had set out on my way home , with joseph for a guide .
and i pray one prayer i repeat it till my tongue stiffens catherine earnshaw , may you not rest as long as i am living ;
bud i can look for norther horse nur man of a neeght loike this as black as t’ chimbley !
well , heathcliff , have you forgotten me ?
“ you must answer it ;
“ the lintons heard us , and with one accord they shot like arrows to the door ;
and master will , very likely , be watching from the parlour-windows to see that they fulfil his orders .
four weeks’ torture , tossing , and sickness !
” he observed , having brooded a while on the scene he had just witnessed :
and why should you try to deceive me by telling a tale ?
and it was nothing less than murder in her eyes for any one to presume to stand up and contradict her .
i sat shuddering , yet , and wiping the perspiration from my forehead :
it can’t be helped .
” i inquired , less sulkily .
” i asked , perceiving catherine to be checked in her friendly advances .
i’ve forgotten .
she did not stay to retaliate , but re-entered in a minute , bearing a reaming silver pint , whose contents i lauded with becoming earnestness .
the splendid head of mrs linton , and the graceful one of her husband .
for the kinder among us did not wish to fret the master , so we humoured his partiality ;
and i told him how she had resolved , previous to his coming , on exhibiting a fit of frenzy .
so , repeating my desire that she would remain there , i was about to hurry home as fast as i could , when an approaching sound arrested me .
it seemed a long while to us all the three days of his absence and often did little cathy ask when he would be home .
he had retired to private prayer in his chamber , and mr and mrs earnshaw were engaging missy’s attention by sundry gay trifles bought for her to present to the little lintons , as an acknowledgment of their kindness .
” she , however , gave a different response evidently , for his forehead cleared as she stooped and whispered in his ear .
they lifted their eyes together , to encounter mr heathcliff :
“ her mind wanders , sir , ” i interposed .
you shall get the full benefit of the torment , as long as it lasts .
and at present i shall put out your candle .
i said her days were divided between us ;
they preferred taking it out of doors , under the trees , and i set a little table to accommodate them .
which she feared had gained no embellishment from its contact with his .
“ i’m not wishing you greater torment than i have , heathcliff .
and that gave exactly an hour for every mile of the usual way from wuthering heights .
she lives there still .
i’m glad you possess a consolation , for all you had in me is gone .
it was a disadvantage to the lad ;
but here is kenneth ;
“ you have lived here a considerable time , ” i commenced ;
let me hope my constitution is almost peculiar :
having levelled my palace , don’t erect a hovel and complacently admire your own charity in giving me that for a home .
it is as bad as offering satan a lost soul .
i’m delightfully rewarded for my kindness to each !
on the fifth morning , or rather afternoon , a different step approached lighter and shorter ;
“ maister , maister , he’s staling t’ lanthern !
“ i cannot tell them yet ,’ he answered .
the distance from the gate to the grange is two miles ;
i declined joining their breakfast , and , at the first gleam of dawn , took an opportunity of escaping into the free air , now clear , and still , and cold as impalpable ice .
the return of sunshine was welcomed by answering sunshine from him .
“ hardly more than a year ago .
i snatched it away , however , and seized his arm .
and we were forced to dismount , and leave ours to graze .
“ now , mind you don’t talk with and notice your cousin too much , ” were my whispered instructions as we entered the room .
one can’t help missing an old companion :
the rainy night had ushered in a misty morning half frost , half drizzle and temporary brooks crossed our path gurgling from the uplands .
“ i have my bundle of keys in my pocket :
zillah urging flakes of flame up the chimney with a colossal bellows ;
i obeyed :
“ in whichever place the soul lives .
and that she has been brought up like an only daughter , whom every one was ready to serve .
catherine told hareton who she was , and where she was going ;
“ nelly , help me to convince her of her madness .
he saw i knew nought about it , and he told how a gentleman and lady had stopped to have a horse’s shoe fastened at a blacksmith’s shop , two miles out of gimmerton , not very long after midnight !
the period of reflection succeeding this silly action compelled me to admit the necessity of smothering my pride and choking my wrath , and bestirring myself to remove its effects .
and i resolved to be cautious how i ventured under those rafters a third time .
” she repeated , exerting her utmost efforts to cause the iron muscles to relax ;
the business of eating being concluded , and no one uttering a word of sociable conversation , i approached a window to examine the weather .
and peat-mould almost buries it .
don’t you feel that you could ?
we’ve braved its ghosts often together , and dared each other to stand among the graves and ask them to come .
he grew pale , and rose up , eyeing her all the while , with an expression of mortal hate .
they are thrown away on me .
or must i have a fire lighted elsewhere ?
except , perhaps , during her earliest visits to linton .
catherine always spoke of it as her house .
hareton did not appear to feel this threat ;
had i been born where laws are less strict and tastes less dainty , i should treat myself to a slow vivisection of those two , as an evening’s amusement .
but our old house was invisible ;
“ heathcliff .
and you must finish it in the same style .
what’s your grievance ?
you are partial i know ;
two pictures in a gold case , on one side her mother , and on the other uncle , when they were young .
i have something to say to ellen dean in private .
i touched his hand , and spoke .
still , mind you , be frank and cordial with him ;
“ what do i want with yours ?
he drank the spirits and impatiently bade us go ;
mrs linton’s funeral was appointed to take place on the friday following her decease ;
on one of these i stretched myself , and grimalkin mounted the other .
“ are you going to listen to her ravings ?
he’s mad to speak so !
” he said .
and that i had a great mind to tell him .
” asked heathcliff .
“ yester-evening i sat in my nook reading some old books till late on towards twelve .
“ because she must either accept him or remain a prisoner , and you along with her , till your master dies .
“ it’s weel eneugh to ate a few porridge in .
“ you are talking in your sleep !
you’re pining for pure love , are you not ?
at last , picturing his death and funeral :
a fly-leaf bore the inscription “ catherine earnshaw , her book , ” and a date some quarter of a century back .
i guess you’ll report what you hear and see to the cipher at the grange ;
“ in other words , i must wish for edgar linton’s great blue eyes and even forehead , ” he replied .
that will be a prompt way of finishing all , when i am pushed to extremity !
and mind you don’t grieve her by crying to-night .
you fight against that devil for love as long as you may ;
she beat hareton , or any child , at a good passionate fit of crying .
there it is :
i guess his return will make a jubilee to her .
a pale , delicate , effeminate boy , who might have been taken for my master’s younger brother , so strong was the resemblance :
the dismal spiritual atmosphere overcame , and more than neutralised , the glowing physical comforts round me ;
“ i am not afraid of you !
however , he moved off to open the door , and , as he raised the latch , he looked up to the inscription above , and said , with a stupid mixture of awkwardness and elation :
” asked the hermit , glaring like a hungry wolf .
his brightening mind brightened his features , and added spirit and nobility to their aspect :
and there lay immense consolation in that thought .
“ now he is here , ” i exclaimed .
” said a voice as sweet as a silver bell .
and though it be only the second week in january , i propose getting out on horseback in a day or two , and riding over to wuthering heights , to inform my landlord that i shall spend the next six months in london ;
except that , as i supposed , the goal of her pilgrimage was penistone crags ;
she returned , and asked me to sit with her in the library .
the tears gushed from linton’s eyes as he answered , “ yes , yes , i am !
and joseph told hindley , who came out and fell to questioning him of what he had been doing , and how he had been living ;
the little monkey had crept by the skylight of one garret , along the roof , into the skylight of the other , and it was with the utmost difficulty i could coax her out again .
mr heathcliff paused and wiped his forehead ;
for t’ sake o’ quietness .
but , without showing further consciousness of the offence , i hastened to add “ the truth is , sir , i passed the first part of the night in ” here i stopped afresh i was about to say “ perusing those old volumes , ” then it would have revealed my knowledge of their written , as well as their printed , contents ;
why did you hold the candle horizontally ?
“ papa !
and i know he loves me , and for that reason i love him .
the end of earnshaw was what might have been expected ;
there is a talk about you at gimmerton .
who was a well-made , athletic youth , good-looking in features , and stout and healthy , but attired in garments befitting his daily occupations of working on the farm and lounging among the moors after rabbits and game .
but not an angel .
to be absent and silent for three years , and never to think of me !
the same moon shone through the window ;
beware of uttering one breath of this to any one at the grange .
i did not recall that they had been at all .
” said catherine .
i took her hand in mine , and bid her be composed ;
” he growled .
she seemed in flighty spirits , and replied merrily , “ i hardly spoke a word , ellen , and there he has gone out twice , crying .
it was just what he intended .
and , now and then , your uncle may join you in a walk :
und i mun tak’ him soa now ye knaw !
my father was just buried , and my misery arose from the separation that hindley had ordered between me and heathcliff .
“ except where i’ve flown .
shall i tell him to come up ?
his abode at the heights was an oppression past explaining .
he was master , and availed himself of the master’s privilege to walk straight in , without saying a word .
i felt no inclination to tarry the event ;
for he had a kind heart , though he was rather severe sometimes .
but he was sick and could eat little , and my attempts to entertain him were thrown away .
“ i swear linton is dying , ” repeated heathcliff , looking hard at me .
i’d not care that heathcliff gained his ends , and triumphed in robbing me of my last blessing !
and , as i fancied , adroitly dropped mrs dean’s note on to her knee , unnoticed by hareton but she asked aloud , “ what is that ?
the sound of our informant’s voice directed him to the library ;
hear me this time , catherine , at last !
now , supported on one arm , and not noticing my refusal to obey her , she seemed to find childish diversion in pulling the feathers from the rents she had just made , and ranging them on the sheet according to their different species :
the cheeks were sallow , and half covered with black whiskers ;
it would degrade me to marry heathcliff now ;
then says he , there’s somebody gone after ’em , i guess ?’ i stared .
if he had remained among the larches all night , he would have heard nothing of the stir at the grange ;
i did not marvel how catherine earnshaw could forget her first friend for such an individual .
and i dared not rouse the family , and fill the place with confusion ;
i had read earnshaw twenty times for linton) “ i’m come home :
“ he trampled on and kicked you , and dashed you on the ground ,’ i whispered .
and returned muttering “ i have no pity !
his dress and speech were both rude , entirely devoid of the superiority observable in mr and mrs heathcliff ;
many could not imagine the existence of happiness in a life of such complete exile from the world as you spend , mr heathcliff ;
keep by me , catherine ;
the stolidity with which i received these instructions was , no doubt , rather exasperating :
i guessed , by his preparations , that egress was allowed , and , leaving my hard couch , made a movement to follow him .
” cried she , her fingers tingling to repeat the act , and her ears red with rage .
” she repeated , trembling all over .
i thoroughly gauged his disposition from his behaviour , and saw at once it would be folly to attempt humouring him .
mr heathcliff awoke me ;
i’ll engage he’s lurking there .
and now he stared at her so earnestly that i thought the very intensity of his gaze would bring tears into his eyes ;
it’s yon flaysome , graceless quean , that’s witched our lad , wi’ her bold een and her forrard ways till nay !
and that couple of black fiends , so deeply buried , who never open their windows boldly , but lurk glinting under them , like devil’s spies ?
“ you’d better seek shelter somewhere else to-night !’ i exclaimed , in rather a triumphant tone .
i’d rather stay with uncle .
” said i .
we did despise them !
a low frock with short sleeves , and nothing on either head or neck .
the intruder appeared to hesitate , and muttered to himself .
which , from their mutual accusations , we understood they had nearly pulled in two between them .
“ it will be too far for me , ” murmured her cousin :
but , imagining they would scarcely understand tacit insults , i unfortunately indulged in winking and making faces at the trio , and some turn of my physiognomy so irritated madam , that she suddenly broke into a fury and leapt on my knees .
i can’t tell how he knew of it , unless he listened .
but you are in a bad temper , and don’t deserve to hear .
whether they satisfied cathy i don’t know ;
in stretching to pull them , her hat fell off ;
it was the trot of a horse ;
he gave all the servants but me , notice to quit .
some thirteen years after the decease of catherine , when linton was twelve , or a little more .
though it encountered temporary interruptions .
tell the truth about it , linton ;
“ no !
i didn’t do it all , ” said his cousin .
then , t’ fooil gangs banning un raving to his cham’er , makking dacent fowks dig thur fingers i’ thur lugs fur varry shame ;
and bemoaned him with that strong grief which springs naturally from a generous heart , though it be tough as tempered steel .
he’ll never let his friends be at ease , and he’ll never be at ease himself !
“ it is only your guest , sir , ” i called out , desirous to spare him the humiliation of exposing his cowardice further .
“ it is the best !
supposing it were a sign of death !
wuthering heights and mr heathcliff did not exist for her :
it is deplorable ignorance of his character , child , and nothing else , which makes that dream enter your head .
i was a child ;
i mentioned it for her , and obtained permission to order her out of doors :
while untying the knot round the hook , it seemed to me that i repeatedly caught the beat of horses’ feet galloping at some distance ;
i had risen in angry rebellion against providence .
it is by compulsion that i do the slightest act not prompted by one thought ;
you’ll own that i’ve outmatched hindley there .
and admired the shining kitchen utensils , the polished clock , decked in holly , the silver mugs ranged on a tray ready to be filled with mulled ale for supper ;
afterwards settle my score with hindley ;
“ no , ” she persisted , “ i won’t :
i never dare disobey him , mrs dean ;
i sha’n’t stay any longer .
i asked if mr heathcliff were at home ?
hindley descended more leisurely , sobered and abashed .
he opened the door immediately , and said “ nelly , come here is it morning ?
he was not insolent to his benefactor , he was simply insensible ;
quarrel with edgar , if you please , heathcliff , and deceive his sister :
“ no , ” he replied ;
don’t get the expression of a vicious cur that appears to know the kicks it gets are its desert , and yet hates all the world , as well as the kicker , for what it suffers .
it is a long fight ;
hareton stared up , and scratched his head like a true clown .
but now he smiled when he met her eye , and softened his voice in addressing her ;
and yet he’d be quite capable of marrying your fortune and expectations :
” and never stirred or spoke again ;
but they appeared very worthless trash to me .
adding , however , a solemn warning , that if she were so insane as to encourage that worthless suitor , it would dissolve all bonds of relationship between herself and him .
the murdered do haunt their murderers , i believe .
we separated !
” cried i .
what had played jabez’s part in the row ?
i thought the memory of the hour i came down that glen a bridegroom would be less sweet than the anticipation that i was soon , in a few months , or , possibly , weeks , to be carried up , and laid in its lonely hollow !
“ i’m animated with hunger ;
having noticed a slight movement , i turned my head , and saw him rise from the bench , and steal out noiselessly .
and don’t let me see your eyes !
“ did she come to wuthering heights because she hated you ?
“ ay nay , ” he drawled .
i’m positive of that .
“ but my father threatened me , ” gasped the boy , clasping his attenuated fingers , “ and i dread him i dread him !
and not only larks , but throstles , and blackbirds , and linnets , and cuckoos pouring out music on every side , and the moors seen at a distance , broken into cool dusky dells ;
” the spectre showed a spectre’s ordinary caprice :
about the middle of the night , i was wakened from my first nap by mrs linton gliding into my chamber , taking a seat on my bedside , and pulling me by the hair to rouse me .
notwithstanding my hurry , i stayed to examine it , lest ever after i should have the conviction impressed on my imagination that it was a creature of the other world .
“ and where is the sense of that ?
some of them struck me as singularly odd compounds of ardour and flatness ;
i fancied the discontent of age and disease arose from his family disagreements ;
do be quick ;
hindley sat opposite , his head leant on his hand ;
we , at the grange , never got a very succinct account of his state preceding it ;
“ of dissolving with her , and being more happy still !
and since then my presence is as potent on his nerves as a ghost ;
” mused linton .
“ nay , sir , ” i could not avoid answering , “ he’ll touch nothing , not he :
” she answered , skurrying away with a pan of hot cinders .
i approached her , pretending to desire a view of the garden ;
you’ll only be in the way , coming downstairs so early :
who is it ?
zillah has told me something of the way they go on , otherwise i should hardly know who was dead and who living .
that’s dreadful !
there was not a soul else that she might fashion into an adviser .
“ no , nelly , i have not , ” he answered .
“ just beyond those hills :
he’s got over it .
“ come in , ” said i , taking cathy by the arm and half forcing her to re-enter ;
so i replied , i didn’t know how she took it into her head to sit up ;
“ i shall connect them with you , and hate them .
one or two is early enough for a person who lies till ten .
i settled his doubts , by suddenly retrieving my gravity and desiring him to walk away , for i came to see linton , not him .
“ that’s right !
“ but may i not write a note to tell him why i cannot come ?
mr heathcliff , be kind enough to bid this friend of yours release me :
there was mad resolution in her face .
“ i wonder you should select the thick of a snow-storm to ramble about in .
” for i dared not go in myself again just then .
i’ll kill her , ellen dean , if you let her come into my sight again !
mr linton , on his part , spent his time in the library , and did not inquire concerning his wife’s occupations .
“ it does appear odd i see a face in it !
“ hareton , i’ll leave this book upon the chimney-piece , and i’ll bring some more to-morrow .
and you , darling child , shall come to us !
draw your knitting out of your pocket that will do now continue the history of mr heathcliff , from where you left off , to the present day .
and i hate to have them debased and profaned in his mouth !
she sighed , and moaned , and knew nobody .
the harvest moon shone clear outside .
” said linton .
she was a perfect recluse ;
all old friends .
notwithstanding , my journey homeward was sadder than my journey thither ;
the little dog was yelping in the garden yet .
one hoped , and the other despaired :
for the moment i closed my eyes , she was either outside the window , or sliding back the panels , or entering the room , or even resting her darling head on the same pillow as she did when a child ;
you’ll not be surprised , ellen , at my feeling particularly cheerless , seated in worse than solitude on that inhospitable hearth , and remembering that four miles distant lay my delightful home , containing the only people i loved on earth ;
you’re fit for a prince in disguise .
but he was too good to be thoroughly unhappy long .
the following night she seemed more impatient still ;
i dreamt once that i was there .
poor hareton was squalling and kicking in his father’s arms with all his might , and redoubled his yells when he carried him upstairs and lifted him over the banister .
fling her into the kitchen !
the larks were silent , the young leaves of the early trees smitten and blackened .
the household went to bed ;
it is impracticable ;
and , if you mention coming here to him , he’ll put a veto on your visits altogether .
i replaced it in her lap , and stood waiting till it should please her to glance down ;
but they may account for some otherwise unaccountable phases of humour which i show .
i hate him to be flogged !
i have always gone to his little parlour , since that night ;
“ oh , indeed !
mr heathcliff followed , his accidental merriment expiring quickly in his habitual moroseness .
“ catherine , why are you crying , love ?
it is not in him to be loved like me :
and he’ll take measures to secure his house and its inmates from any such unwarrantable intrusions !
one of the maids , a thoughtless girl , who had been on an early errand to gimmerton , came panting upstairs , open-mouthed , and dashed into the chamber , crying :
“ it was because you disliked mr heathcliff , ” she answered .
there are those who speak to having met him near the church , and on the moor , and even within this house .
the roof has been kept whole hitherto ;
but it is not right to speak of them with levity .
and a wooden bowl of oatmeal stood on the settle close by .
but she was almost at the door-stones already , scampering round the brow at full speed .
necessity compelled me to seek shelter here ;
“ it ’ud be to more sense .
i brought him down one evening , the day before yesterday , and just set him in a chair , and never touched him afterwards .
this time she has provoked me when i could not bear it ;
i expected such a transformation on raising the lid , but i’m better pleased that it should not commence till i share it .
it is childish ;
i shouldn’t care what you suffered .
” asked catherine dolefully , bending over him .
that is the glass the mirror , mrs linton ;
but they would suffer no resurrection , and i was forced to lie till their malignant masters pleased to deliver me :
“ well !
that dream is reserved for the solace of our declining years .
and , at the instant when my eye quitted hareton , he gave a sudden spring , delivered himself from the careless grasp that held him , and fell .
but at that announcement she hastily disengaged herself , and whistled to minny , who obeyed her like a dog .
“ you are aware , mr heathcliff , ” i said , “ that from the time you were thirteen years old you have lived a selfish , unchristian life ;
only they needn’t keep their company , if they be disagreeable and bad .
you shall walk with me , nelly .
i shall go , notwithstanding .
and there you see the distinction between our feelings :
it’s a pity she could not be content .
he’s rapidly regaining flesh since he lost his better half .
but sit down , and let me take your hat , and i’ll tell you all about it .
“ away after them !
they would not shut :
this endurance made old earnshaw furious , when he discovered his son persecuting the poor fatherless child , as he called him .
“ wretched inmates !
and a perverse will , that indulged children invariably acquire , whether they be good tempered or cross .
you’re to nurse it , nelly :
the stones were smooth and neatly cemented , and the rosebushes and blackberry stragglers could yield no assistance in re-ascending .
“ well , he wishes to see you , ” said i , guessing her need of an interpreter .
fancying i might manage to creep into the house , and up to linton’s room , unobserved .
she got downstairs before me , and out into the garden , where she had seen her cousin performing some easy work ;
” observed he , more cheerfully .
and those those detestable creatures won’t bring coals to the fire .
and that of others is altogether unvalued and uncoveted by me .
an admirable form , and the most exquisite little face that i have ever had the pleasure of beholding ;
“ i cannot commit murder ,’ i replied .
“ and i was miserable and bitter at everybody ;
catherine took a hand of each of the children , and brought them into the house and set them before the fire , which quickly put colour into their white faces .
yet , i think , not very happy .
where are you ?
that housekeeper left , if i recollect rightly , two years after he came ;
which , though familiar , were free from the dreary associations investing her hated sick chamber .
mrs linton took off the grey cloak of the dairy-maid which we had borrowed for our excursion , shaking her head and expostulating with her , i suppose :
and then mr green told him he had a little business in the village that must be done ;
we were left at peace in our beds as long as the summer moon shone , but the moment a blast of winter returns , you must run for shelter !
i’d rather see edgar at bay than you .
and hard work i had to obtain a promise that she would not lay the grievance before her father .
but you’ll force me to pinch the baby and make it scream before it moves your charity .
” she said , smiling as sweet as honey , and creeping close up .
that proves i love him better than myself .
i rode into the court .
i outstripped kenneth , and ran most of the way back .
a cold blast rushed through ;
i’d give a great deal to know .
i was beyond regarding self-respect , weighed down by fatigue and wretchedness .
“ get it ready , will you ?
the mortal terror he felt of mr heathcliff’s anger restored to the boy his coward’s eloquence .
“ thrushcross grange is my own , sir , ” he interrupted , wincing .
but i guess where he lives :
” she continued , after a pause ;
” i said , shocked at his godless indifference .
her eyes began to glisten and her lids to twinkle .
no , almost nothing very much excited , and wild , and glad !
he took the one i had away , and ordered her to resign hers to me ;
heathcliff chuckled a fiendish laugh at the idea .
“ are there no boys at the farm ?
“ it is not eight o’clock !
no mate for you .
and he does not interfere with my arrangements .
with this insult my patience was at an end .
but the bran came out of h .
finally , earnshaw crossed over , and whispered to me .
but mine are boiling , and the sight of such chillness makes them dance .
nothing else in the world :
“ oppen t’ door !
be quick , and say whether i was wrong !
and his abstraction was evidently so deep , and his whole aspect so misanthropical , that i shrank from disturbing him again .
“ because you are not fit to go there , ” i answered .
but this i can say , he does not resemble his father ;
why don’t you visit at the grange with linton ?
i have a conviction that they can , and do , exist among us !
cathy stayed at thrushcross grange five weeks :
catherine lay in a troubled sleep :
“ he’s there , is he ?’ exclaimed my companion , rushing to the gap .
it has been waiting near an hour .
by this curious turn of disposition i have gained the reputation of deliberate heartlessness ;
“ to the bottom of the park , ” she stammered .
i know that ghosts have wandered on earth .
“ if you have not courage to attack him , make an apology , or allow yourself to be beaten .
and imagining she would have the whole place to herself , she managed , by some means , to inform mr edgar of her brother’s absence , and was then preparing to receive him .
i swept it along the carpet , and then memory burst in :
you may call at wuthering heights this afternoon , if you like , and say that i am not angry , but i’m sorry to have lost her ;
far better that she should be dead , than lingering a burden and a misery-maker to all about her .
i wish i were a girl again , half savage and hardy , and free ;
he replied audibly enough , in a fashion which made my companion vociferate , more clamorously than before , that a wide distinction might be drawn between saints like himself and sinners like his master .
having too small a stock of hypocrisy at my command to pretend any anxiety for the danger that menaced him .
any relic of the dead is precious , if they were valued living .
i vociferated curses enough to annihilate any fiend in christendom ;
it vanished in a twinkling ;
but do you like her ?
avarice is growing with him a besetting sin .
he seized , and thrust her from the room ;
” she exclaimed in an irritated tone ;
his huge , purple tongue hanging half a foot out of his mouth , and his pendent lips streaming with bloody slaver .
she did not mention the visit that night , because she did not see mr linton .
not yet .
come , give me a true history of the event .
we saw its nest in the winter , full of little skeletons .
they were hungry after their ride , and easily consoled , since no real harm had befallen them .
he noticed this , and thrust at an inner door with the end of his spade , intimating by an inarticulate sound that there was the place where i must go , if i changed my locality .
on that bleak hill top the earth was hard with a black frost , and the air made me shiver through every limb .
he was quite strong and healthy ;
i don’t like to see it !
unluckily , it was a heap of dead rabbits .
“ heathcliff has your permission to come a-courting to miss , and to drop in at every opportunity your absence offers , on purpose to poison the mistress against you ?
mr linton , sir , don’t lay by your gun .’ no , no , robert ,’ said the old fool .
“ and then you would like me as well as your father ?
it cannot be .
“ and how isn’t that nowt comed in fro’ th’ field , be this time ?
and , though i’m glad he’s better in health , i’m sorry he’s so much less pleasant , and so much less affectionate to me .
i never expected that your nerves would be disordered :
confirming , when i returned , the servant’s statement .
but what do you mean ?
” she answered , “ she doesn’t bide here :
” cried catherine , swallowing her greeting .
answer !
it is nicer than sunshine .
edgar , in his anxiety for her , forgot her hated friend .
and then , i thought , how ever will that weakling live at wuthering heights ?
” he replied .
” cried mrs linton in answer .
“ you’re right sickly yet .
“ then , ” i continued , “ my predecessor’s name was linton ?
i notice , when i enter his presence , the muscles of his countenance are involuntarily distorted into an expression of hatred ;
my housekeeper never wearies of talking about and praising you ;
the dog’s endeavour to avoid him was unsuccessful ;
remember to tell him .
vigorous puffs , and a resolute stare into the grate , declared he had no ear for this appeal .
“ oh , you have been on them !
we are vanquished !
his evil genius , almost as gaunt and ghastly , leant against the chimney .
he would not have thought of beginning , i’m certain .
his naturally reserved disposition was exaggerated into an almost idiotic excess of unsociable moroseness ;
not to grieve a kind master , i learned to be less touchy ;
an expression of exceeding sorrow overcast his features :
i thought it was morning ;
“ i can’t bear your talking .
but i soon found her delirious strength much surpassed mine (she was delirious , i became convinced by her subsequent actions and ravings) .
after concluding these precious orisons and they lasted generally till he grew hoarse and his voice was strangled in his throat he would be off again ;
“ he’s good and patient now .
linton repeated his laugh , and glanced at hareton tauntingly ;
and in breaking it , you have broken mine .
i thought she was half silly , from her behaviour while that went on :
lest she should be restless , and anxious to visit the heights .
” she cried , recovering her speech ;
the minute after a step traversed the hall ;
and who can be ill-natured and bad-tempered when they encounter neither opposition nor indifference ?
you mention that name and i end the matter instantly by a spring from the window !
a propensity to be saucy was one ;
in summer miss catherine delighted to climb along these trunks , and sit in the branches , swinging twenty feet above the ground ;
then she comprehended that earnshaw took the master’s reputation home to himself ;
and was marvellously discomfited that i didn’t think the same .
” i answered .
and when catherine was convalescent , she insisted on conveying her to thrushcross grange :
oh , damnation !
“ oh , if i were but in my own bed in the old house !
i wish i could annihilate it from the face of the earth .
two words would comprehend my future death and hell :
“ you should not have spoken to him !
“ come and see me , ellen ;
“ i’ll not hold my tongue !’ i said ;
for it was there yet .
stop , you have had nothing to eat , have you ?
“ i want nothing :
i’ll not trust you over the threshold again , you naughty , naughty girl !
and joseph is upstairs :
” she panted , flinging her arms round his neck .
the former was a boy of fourteen , but when he drew out what had been a fiddle , crushed to morsels in the great-coat , he blubbered aloud ;
catherine’s despair was as silent as her father’s joy .
he’ll be as much to me as he has been all his lifetime .
i’m driven down here by the cold ;
and i fancy he sees me often , though i am not near .
shall i break the seal ?
“ be silent !
” i said , “ the kitchen is so comfortable ;
” she cried eagerly , “ that’s my room with the candle in it , and the trees swaying before it ;
i shut it , and took up another and another , till i had examined all .
pure , bracing ventilation they must have up there at all times , indeed :
i was vain of his commendations , and softened towards the being by whose means i earned them , and thus hindley lost his last ally :
and the success of her fulfilled resolution was obvious on the morrow :
having my designs in encouraging his talk .
heathcliff gazed after him , and sighed .
and i felt i must forgive him :
he would not permit it :
i had remarked on one side of the road , at intervals of six or seven yards , a line of upright stones , continued through the whole length of the barren :
she would gladly have gathered it up at this information , but hareton beat her ;
i can’t forget your words , ellen ;
and he stared hard at the object of discourse , as one might do at a strange repulsive animal :
why are you stopping there ?’ she cried , in a tone of disgust .
i couldn’t explain to edgar how certain i felt of having a fit , or going raging mad , if he persisted in teasing me !
i listened doubtingly an instant ;
i reflected as the good woman descended to receive the doctor :
” wept cathy , no longer disguising her trouble .
“ and why are they bright so long after it is evening here ?
but i dissented :
“ i’ve prayed often , ” he half soliloquised , “ for the approach of what is coming ;
and catherine , on her part , had no idea why her father should be crosser and less patient in his ailing condition than he was in his prime .
“ what can you mean by talking in this way to me !
i yield all my interest in him to you .
we searched the house , above and below , and the yard and stables ;
the longer he stood , the plainer his reflections revealed their blackness through his features .
when have i been harsh , tell me ?
he maintained a hard , careless deportment , indicative of neither joy nor sorrow :
the light came from thence ;
you’ve brought it , have you ?
despise me as much as you please ;
and i had hit upon the plan of removing it , that he might do less mischief if he did go the length of firing the gun .
“ if there’s to be fresh ortherings just when i getten used to two maisters , if i mun hev’ a mistress set o’er my heead , it’s like time to be flitting .
he was donned in his sunday garments , with his most sanctimonious and sourest face , and , holding his hat in one hand , and his stick in the other , he proceeded to clean his shoes on the mat .
“ heathcliff frequently visits at the grange , ” answered i , “ though more on the strength of the mistress having known him when a boy , than because the master likes his company .
“ oh , give them to me , and i’ll never , never do so again !
it was not the attorney .
offering the right hand of fellowship to his enemies all around !
and she rewarded him with such a summer of sweetness and affection in return as made the house a paradise for several days ;
now , as soon as he beheld her , his first precaution was to take a sweeping survey of the house-front .
and , whether you like your precious mate , or not , you must come :
yet still i found she had not gathered its import , for , upon my desiring to hear her reply , she merely pointed to the name , and gazed at me with mournful and questioning eagerness .
she hardly raised her eyes to notice me , and continued her employment with the same disregard to common forms of politeness as before ;
“ it wants twenty minutes , sir , to taking the medicine , ” she commenced .
miss cathy and he were now very thick ;
i used to draw a comparison between him and hindley earnshaw , and perplex myself to explain satisfactorily why their conduct was so opposite in similar circumstances .
“ damn the doctor !
mr edgar’s coldness depressed me exceedingly ;
perhaps , had he been aware of his nephew’s disposition and state of health , he would have seen fit to withhold even that slight consolation .
“ what !
i , having vainly begged the wilful girl to rise and remove her wet things , left him preaching and her shivering , and betook myself to bed with little hareton , who slept as fast as if everyone had been sleeping round him .
“ now i think of it , i’d better tell you .
“ it may be very possible that i should love her ;
because i would rather be miserable than that he should be :
my master quickly sprang erect , and struck him full on the throat a blow that would have levelled a slighter man .
the master tried to explain the matter ;
mr heathcliff , you’re a cruel man , but you’re not a fiend ;
he minded little what tale was told since he had what he wanted .
but you don’t despise me , do you , miss ?
he asserted it himself ;
joseph was bending over the fire , peering into a large pan that swung above it ;
he answered , i must try to endure it another hour , and they went away .
down with you .
“ where is she my amiable lady ?
“ you must read it immediately , because it wants an answer .
“ it will be odd if i thwart myself , ” he muttered , unconscious that i was behind him .
i mused :
not so my companion :
it gave me a start to see him alone .
“ and does miss linton turn a cold shoulder on him ?
“ it’s maister linton i mun spake to , ” he answered , waving me disdainfully aside .
“ about three times , i think , we have been merry and hopeful , as we were the first evening ;
at the grange , every one knows your sister would have been living now had it not been for mr heathcliff .
i beg pardon for asking ;
wash that stuff away ;
ah !
but treachery and violence are spears pointed at both ends ;
nor will i bring him into more trouble .
he raised his missile to hurl it ;
mine was rocking in a rustling green tree , with a west wind blowing , and bright white clouds flitting rapidly above ;
i demanded my release .
when i first looked into his face , i perceived that he had got intelligence of the catastrophe ;
“ no , i should never love anybody better than papa , ” she returned gravely .
i sometimes wonder at him with an intensity that deadens my fear :
i’ve ordered hareton to obey him :
there was a carpet a good one , but the pattern was obliterated by dust ;
they had already entered the court .
and sore misgivings came over me that there was slight hope of that .
“ and help your own naughty pet and mine .
he was a young man , respectably dressed and seated at a table , having a book before him .
oh !
catherine loved it too :
above the chimney were sundry villainous old guns , and a couple of horse-pistols :
at least , you’ll think you will , and that’s the same .
you are an exception ,’ answered mrs heathcliff .
“ yes , ” he replied , “ your mother’s nephew .
“ why , almost bright and cheerful .
my young lady gave him several looks , as if she could not exactly make up her mind what to think of him ;
you see you have got into pretty company , ” i interposed .
you deserve this .
he apparently put some question which she had no mind to answer .
i got up and offered her my seat in the arm-chair .
he now recommenced his moody walk , and i raised the latch , and escaped into the kitchen .
my eyes were on the moon , and my back to the entrance , when i heard a voice behind me say , “ nelly , is that you ?
for a few days , i said , he seemed regardless of the puny successor to the departed :
the single servant returned first .
“ no , that man is not my son , ” answered heathcliff , pushing me aside .
because i don’t think of having another opportunity in a hurry .
but ere he had crossed the door-stones , mr heathcliff , coming up the causeway , encountered him , and laying hold of his shoulder asked , “ what’s to do now , my lad ?
but i don’t care who knows that the passion was wholly on one side :
but hareton was often obliged to seek the kitchen also , when the master wanted to have the house to himself ;
and i can’t speak while those clouds are floating in my face .
yet he would not consent formally to exclude hareton and cathy .
dawn restored me to common sense .
soa , yah may plase yerseln !
but papa asked what was the matter , and i explained it .
the lock was re-secured .
“ but i have one , and you have seen him before too ;
and this is what she told me .
“ hareton , thou willn’t sup thy porridge to-neeght ;
by the fool’s craving to hear evil of self , that haunts some people like a demon !
they had both been fond husbands , and were both attached to their children ;
” he asked , eyeing me in a manner that i could ill endure after this inhospitable treatment .
“ it is in danger of splitting its skull against my knuckles .
vinegar-faced joseph projected his head from a round window of the barn .
how would you feel , then ?
“ is there some new reason for this banishment ?
you know she has not !
for he lived almost as secluded as catherine herself , and was never to be seen .
“ mr hindley , do take warning .
“ hush !
i do myself the honour of calling as soon as possible after my arrival , to express the hope that i have not inconvenienced you by my perseverance in soliciting the occupation of thrushcross grange :
“ this is nothing , ” cried she :
but , being in disgrace , i was not favoured with a description of the interesting objects she saw .
take care .
heathcliff , i shall die !
one on the mother’s , the other on the father’s side :
i am stout , and soon put out of breath ;
it was just when the people were bearing the coffin from the house .
and i partook of the infinite calm in which she lay :
so for your own good , and nothing else , i took precautions that you should not see linton again .
i cannot make it out .
“ i can’t tell where you mean to take me .
yet no arguments could persuade her to return to that apartment , and i had to arrange the parlour sofa for her bed , till another room could be prepared .
i hed aimed to dee wheare i’d sarved fur sixty year ;
“ and just send those books i promised to lend him ?
” “ off , dog !
i rose , and , from a gentlemanly idea of relieving his embarrassment , took up my station in the doorway , surveying the external prospect as i stood .
she visited the empty chambers and examined their windows ;
i thought you wouldn’t come .
and she mutely , and with a sense of intense injury , retired to her private apartment .
i saw her looking through the lattice as i came up the garden causeway , and i nodded to her ;
it struck me soon , however , there would be more sense in endeavouring to repair some of his wrongs than shedding tears over them :
not through that kirkyard .
on the before-named occasion he came into the house to announce his intention of doing nothing , while i was assisting miss cathy to arrange her dress :
or did he get a sizar’s place at college , or escape to america , and earn honours by drawing blood from his foster-country ?
we might have got on tolerably , notwithstanding , but for two people miss cathy , and joseph , the servant :
and a minute after , heathcliff opened the door .
“ sure-ly , ” said joseph after a grave inspection , “ he’s swopped wi’ ye , maister , an’ yon’s his lass !
“ that’s a great tempter to a desperate man , is it not ?
i heard his abominable snorting .
he was as uncomplaining as a lamb ;
“ does linton say so ?
and imagining my sort of books did not suit her , i bid her please herself in the choice of what she perused .
but tell him , also , to set his fraternal and magisterial heart at ease :
indeed , how could she have refused him herself ?
“ i would not talk so , mr heathcliff , ” i interposed .
we cherished the hope that in a little while mr linton’s heart would be gladdened , and his lands secured from a stranger’s gripe , by the birth of an heir .
i considered it best to depart without seeing mr heathcliff , and bring a rescue for my young lady from the grange .
the intimacy thus commenced grew rapidly ;
i’ll ring :
her presence was with me :
and , preceding us up the path , hastened to open the door .
and the sleeper being roused , was lifted to the ground by his uncle .
catherine employed herself in wrapping a handsome book neatly in white paper , and having tied it with a bit of ribbon , and addressed it to “ mr hareton earnshaw , ” she desired me to be her ambassadress , and convey the present to its destined recipient .
whom he abhorred with an intensity which the mildness of his nature would scarcely seem to allow .
i do hate him i am wretched i have been a fool !
can you make that out ?
but i’m hardly going to come to give mr heathcliff pleasure ;
oh , confound the vapid thing !
i resumed my song ;
and now , say how you love him ?
“ now , ” i continued , “ read it .
but , vaguely regarding the flowers , she let the tears collect on her lashes and stream down her cheeks unheeding .
“ i’ll walk in the yard till daylight , and then i’ll be off ;
“ an undeniable truth , ” she replied .
he concealed it from her ;
joseph rattled some fire into the shovel , and went :
however , it’s over , and i’ll take no revenge on his folly ;
and i felt so soothed and comforted to watch them , that i did not notice how time got on .
but edgar arrested her .
i’m annoyed how i should dream of chattering on at such a rate ;
“ he’s gone out at present , and won’t return soon .
i rose to follow , but he turned the lock again .
” she exclaimed .
“ who can help it ?
she wanted to run , breathless as she was , upstairs to mr linton’s room ;
though it is a respectable house :
i made him promise he’d never shoot a lapwing after that , and he didn’t .
will you stay here , and am i to fight my way to catherine over linton and his footman ?
i can’t be prevented from going to wuthering heights , except by inflicting misery on two people ;
at any rate , whatever were my wanderings , the clock chimed twelve as i entered the house ;
no plan offered itself :
you come back ?
that smile , and ghastly paleness !
and calling me all sorts of names for the base spirit i evinced .
no , i’ll swallow the key before you shall get it !
though mr hareton , there , be not the master’s son , he’s your cousin :
she must be somewhere at the heights , i was certain !
there was heathcliff , by himself :
“ she frowned ;
“ long enough to live on nothing but cold water and ill-temper , ” observed i .
“ it’s not his tale :
as soon as i entered i hastened to change my soaked shoes and stockings ;
and i do like i could like to hear her !
” observed he on re-entering .
catherine kissed her father , and sat down quietly to her lessons for a couple of hours , according to custom ;
“ he’ll be in soon .
he wanted somebody with him .
we should be at them :
gooid-for-naught madling !
how should i ?
” he demanded .
” said the doctor .
“ i see the house at wuthering heights has earnshaw’ carved over the front door .
” i called from the inside .
do you hear ?
nay , if you nurse anger , that will be worse to remember than my harsh words !
in my flight through the kitchen i bid joseph speed to his master ;
this is for the sake of one who comprehends in his person my feelings to edgar and myself .
“ for shame !
” he said , speaking short and with difficulty .
now , you shall hear how i have been received in my new home , as i am led to imagine the heights will be .
“ it is true enough .
he rejected the latter , and tossed uneasily on the former , as if it were a stone or a block of wood .
on entering the house , i looked about for some one to give information of catherine .
linton who had been conveyed up to the little parlour soon after i left , was terrified into fetching the key before his father re-ascended .
come to the glass , and i’ll let you see what you should wish .
“ come , catherine , ” i said , “ we must side out’ too :
“ ay , if we can keep him !
and he dreaded that mind :
i’ll do you a kindness in spite of yourself , and hareton justice !
“ nearly ready to run about , nell !
only do not leave me in this abyss , where i cannot find you !
earnshaw swore passionately at me :
“ worst of all .
“ put that down !
we stayed to see it covered .
the meal hardly endured ten minutes .
she had a fever .
turning abruptly , he walked to the fireplace , where he stood , silent , with his back towards us .
and though frequently , when she looked in to bid me good-night , i remarked a fresh colour in her cheeks and a pinkness over her slender fingers , instead of fancying the hue borrowed from a cold ride across the moors , i laid it to the charge of a hot fire in the library .
but never mind linton at present :
he would have risen , and unfixed her fingers by the act she clung fast , gasping :
there were none .
“ ho , miss linton !
“ she’s sadly put out by mr heathcliff’s behaviour :
“ oh , cathy !
” asked linton .
“ no , ” she added , after a while ;
i don’t engage to let hareton go undisputed ;
mrs heathcliff , however , checked me by her answer .
” she whispered in my ear , at last .
“ i’m coming to plead off nothing about it , ” i exclaimed , considerably irritated .
and , had not i prevented it , he would have gone just so to the master , and got full revenge by letting his condition plead for him , intimating who had caused it .
“ well ?
hareton would not open his fingers , so i laid it on his knee .
he succeeded ;
and another , and another .
and they were wondering how they must set about the search for my remains .
it is unutterable !
and , nelly , once for all , let me beg you to warn hareton and the other away from me .
the man took cathy up ;
wish and learn to smooth away the surly wrinkles , to raise your lids frankly , and change the fiends to confident , innocent angels , suspecting and doubting nothing , and always seeing friends where they are not sure of foes .
and leave me , all of you !
but , step in , pray !
but joseph asked what we could be thinking of to roar in that way over a saint in heaven .
catherine had kept up her acquaintance with the lintons since her five-weeks’ residence among them ;
i’m an angel !
master is young , and i am strong , and hardly forty-five .
and a circumstance concealed from all but me heathcliff spent his nights , at least , outside , equally a stranger to repose .
he came upon us quite unexpectedly , entering by the front way , and had a full view of the whole three , ere we could raise our heads to glance at him .
and i supposed the lambs were skittish , and would not be guided .
he can perhaps extract as much enjoyment from the whole ;
“ and she looked like it , too !
ere this speech ended i became sensible of heathcliff’s presence .
“ be more charitable :
he kicked it after me , and shut us out .
“ if they did , you must have me removed secretly ;
at length her suspense was ended :
for what journeys you take , your own feet will serve you .
it commenced in a quarrel .
“ he shook me till my teeth rattled , and pitched me beside joseph , who steadily concluded his supplications , and then rose , vowing he would set off for the grange directly .
” i cried , thinking him deaf , yet highly disgusted at his rudeness .
joseph hastened to administer a dose of spirits , and by their succour his master presently regained motion and consciousness .
” asked mr heathcliff .
but when i got to the parlour where mr and mrs linton were , i could not persuade myself to proceed .
“ tak’ these in to t’ maister , lad , ” he said , “ and bide there .
catherine had seasons of gloom and silence now and then :
mr heathcliff may have entirely dissimilar reasons for keeping his hand out of the way when he meets a would-be acquaintance , to those which actuate me .
an instant they held asunder , and then how they met i hardly saw , but catherine made a spring , and he caught her , and they were locked in an embrace from which i thought my mistress would never be released alive :
“ no , i’m not hungry , ” he answered , averting his head , and speaking rather contemptuously , as if he guessed i was trying to divine the occasion of his good humour .
“ direct me to her room immediately , or i’ll make you sing out sharply .
and i can’t dance attendance on your affectations now !
i do it invariably , even though the minute before i have been recalling a hundred reasons that should make me refrain :
and my heart ached with some great grief which , just waking , i could not recollect .
“ and i’m ready to do justice to the food you give me .
his frame shivering , not as one shivers with chill or weakness , but as a tight-stretched cord vibrates a strong thrilling , rather than trembling .
forget your anger , for she’s hard to guide any way but her own .
so it was dark when we dismounted in the paved yard of the farmhouse , and your old fellow-servant , joseph , issued out to receive us by the light of a dip candle .
you should have taken him from me !
hush , isabella !
you needn’t laugh ;
and kind to her when he got her .
gie me that , ” he replied .
“ i ought , and i wished to remain , ” answered she , “ to cheer edgar and take care of the baby , for two things , and because the grange is my right home .
“ my master will be here in half an hour .
“ she was , ” continued the housekeeper .
“ is it like ?
after all , she was a sweet little girl .
i pondered this sentence painfully , after he was gone .
it’s killing , a breath of night air !
“ should he offer to leave me , he’s a dead man :
“ i won’t go without uncle , ” he cried at length :
i silently shook my questioner , and at last succeeded in equipping her for departure .
and it will be a burning shame to scold them .
“ i can never re-enter that house , ” he answered .
unable to reply , except passionately , i got up and walked from the room .
“ well , don’t talk so fast , miss !
mr kenneth was perplexed to pronounce of what disorder the master died .
and so it was :
“ then she began to bother me , and i said i’d had enough plague with the tiresome thing ;
talking at him ;
and mrs heathcliff , kneeling on the hearth , reading a book by the aid of the blaze .
you are welcome to torture me to death for your amusement , only allow me to amuse myself a little in the same style , and refrain from insult as much as you are able .
he’s patience itsseln wi’ sich careless , offald craters patience itsseln he is !
and what quite confounded me , when he did open his mouth , it was to utter the falsehood that i had occasioned the uproar , and hareton was not to blame !
ever since , i’ve been as stiff as herself ;
they flew off at my approach , and he raised his eyes and spoke :
i needn’t repeat that , because you would call it silly .
” she exclaimed , after the morning’s salutations , “ guess whom i saw yesterday , in my walk on the moors .
“ wouldn’t you rather sit here ?
i won’t stray five yards from your window .
at which i hardly wondered .
” gasped the girl .
then it grew dark ;
as soon as he heard the other members of the family stirring he retired to his den , and i breathed freer .
merely signing catherine away :
he knocks at the door as if he were master here already !
add to this a deep cut under one ear , which only the cold prevented from bleeding profusely , a white face scratched and bruised , and a frame hardly able to support itself through fatigue ;
there he lingered .
where is the pony , miss cathy ?
nay , there’s no comprehending it .
and should a word of mine distress you hereafter , think i feel the same distress underground , and for my own sake , forgive me !
” she gasped , “ and the clock is striking twelve !
only the deity he implored is senseless dust and ashes ;
finally sitting down almost concealed behind it .
playing and trifling are completely banished out of my mind ;
i’d rayther arn my bite an’ my sup wi’ a hammer in th’ road !
he said , in summer , perhaps , they might meet :
but she’s a naughty thing for crying continually ;
but now that you say she may go , she’ll doubtless avail herself of the permission .
you must look once .
mrs heathcliff , i’ll ask you to do nothing ;
i’ve loved many others since :
“ she degenerates into a mere slut !
i surveyed the weapon inquisitively .
she preferred quarrelling with joseph in the kitchen to sitting at peace in her solitude .
his books are not as nice as mine , and he wanted to have them extremely , when i told him how interesting they were .
a great addition , in my eyes , was his being left without an heir .
you mustn’t think i care little for catherine , because i behaved so foolishly on entering :
heathcliff guessed the meaning of her manœuvres , and said “ if you have got anything for isabella (as no doubt you have , nelly) , give it to her .
you must come home directly .
the guest was now the master of wuthering heights :
his pride was hurt , and he’ll never forgive it .
now , since i’ve seen her , i’m pacified a little .
” he snarled , or rather screamed through his nose .
gladly did i take advantage of this intimation ;
don’t take on , and fret about it too much :
a woman whom i knew , and who formerly lived at gimmerton , answered :
and what will all her learning and her daintiness do for her , now ?
and there she sat shivering and clasping her hands , and asking repeatedly “ are they gone yet ?
i shook my head reprovingly , and then she blushed and whispered “ well !
“ take the candle , and go where you please .
with a grave severity in my manner i bade her stand up .
he expected to see me again to-morrow , and there he’ll be so disappointed :
“ no , i shall be your companion there , ” i said .
the mild and generous are only more justly selfish than the domineering ;
“ i wish he would arrive !
come along .
“ let him dare to force you , ” i cried .
and it is concerning him that i demand your attention .
after it was cooked , my fellow-servant and i began to quarrel who should carry some to mr hindley ;
that friday made the last of our fine days for a month .
shoo cannot stale t’ sowl o’ nob’dy !
and i had no more sense , so i put it on the landing of the stairs , hoping it might be gone on the morrow .
not anxious to come in contact with their fangs , i sat still ;
we’ll hope there are years and years to come before any of us go :
speak of your own mind :
“ is he a ghoul or a vampire ?
or will you be my friend , as you have been hitherto , and do what i request ?
and was attached by ties stronger than reason could break chains , forged by habit , which it would be cruel to attempt to loosen .
catherine linton ?
you’d hear of odd things if i lived alone with that mawkish , waxen face :
he’s as strong now as when he first came into the north ;
“ you villain !
he promised to bring me a pocketful of apples and pears , and then he kissed his children , said good-bye , and set off .
“ come in , and kindle me a fire , and do anything there is to do about the room .
i wish you were my brother .
” she lifted a mouthful to her lips :
“ fair means !
i bid her be cautious lest she got a fall , and she nimbly disappeared .
“ i shall bid father good-night first , ” said catherine , putting her arms round his neck , before we could hinder her .
but they may come , and if they do , you run the risk of being scolded for no good .
“ catherine is coming , dear master !
“ what does he want ?
but i started , and bade her hush !
at least , i suppose the weeping was on both sides ;
“ i’m not jealous of you , ” replied the mistress ;
it proved the commencement of delirium :
i’ve persuaded my conscience that it was a duty to warn him how people talked regarding his ways ;
but it is nothing .
the idiots !
let mr linton alone about him , unless you would like an open quarrel between them .
“ he quite deserted !
where we may , every one , join her , if we take due warning and leave our evil ways to follow good !
and he’d be mitch obleeged to us to gang on a bit further .
edgar is sulky , because i’m glad of a thing that does not interest him :
” she answered , holding him as firmly as her strength allowed .
“ what the devil is the matter ?
they shut the house door below , never noting our absence , it was so full of people .
“ it’s no company at all , when people know nothing and say nothing , ” she muttered .
existence , after losing her , would be hell .
and , apparently , perfectly contented .
his cake and cheese remained on the table all night for the fairies .
i’ve cried , too , bitterly yes , more than any one else has reason to cry .
“ these things happened last winter , sir , ” said mrs dean ;
and that insipid , paltry creature attending her from duty and humanity !
“ i should guess it was her own , ” said heathcliff .
it was the same room into which he had been ushered , as a guest , eighteen years before :
“ is he all as he should be ?
” i remarked .
a fragrance of stocks and wallflowers wafted on the air from amongst the homely fruit-trees .
the “ walk in ” was uttered with closed teeth , and expressed the sentiment , “ go to the deuce !
last night i was on the threshold of hell .
that my ” she stopped , and wept outright ;
and he spoke without anger :
come , i’m not going to nurse him .
where would you go ?
he’s your concern now ;
both the room and its occupants , and the scene they gazed on , looked wondrously peaceful .
i know , by instinct , his reserve springs from an aversion to showy displays of feeling to manifestations of mutual kindliness .
and that naturally led me to consider the poor lad’s situation now , and from singing i changed my mind to crying .
“ tell us where you got your lessons , and you shall have it , ” said i .
that is , if she thought or listened at all ;
and the thoughts of what i was should give me courage and dignity to support the oppressions of a little farmer !
he was the only thing there that seemed decent ;
i want to have one word with her your mistress .
such an individual seated in his arm-chair , his mug of ale frothing on the round table before him , is to be seen in any circuit of five or six miles among these hills , if you go at the right time after dinner .
“ about the rent , ” i answered .
however , master , you’ll have plenty of time to get acquainted with him and see whether he would suit her :
she began singing very low , till his fingers dropped from hers , and his head sank on his breast .
but i was sure i should see her there .
is she sorry for her shameful conduct ?
but suddenly composing himself , he fell on his knees , and raised his hands , and returned thanks that the lawful master and the ancient stock were restored to their rights .
i observed several splashes of blood about the bark of the tree , and his hand and forehead were both stained ;
under the porch , a girl of nine or ten sat knitting , and an old woman reclined on the housesteps , smoking a meditative pipe .
but they don’t care for me .
the master looked asleep , and i ventured soon after sunrise to quit the room and steal out to the pure refreshing air .
“ good-evening , joseph , ” i said , coldly .
and i’ll not get up , and i’ll not take my eyes from your face till you look back at me !
catherine !
“ and what did the master answer ?
she threw down her pipe and bustled in , the girl followed , and i entered too ;
i was not aware how openly i grieved , till earnshaw halted opposite , in his measured walk , and gave me a stare of newly-awakened surprise .
she recognised nobody from the time you left her , ” i said .
it looked more like fear .
“ he does not know his letters , ” he said to his cousin .
“ no , she’s a sly one , ” he remarked , shaking his head .
it was a very dark evening for summer :
i’ll make her howl a recantation !
where were you last night ?
and that his condition of health is not occasioned by attachment to you .
“ oh !
and , because i laughed , he burned his books , and dropped it :
“ and i want some living creature to keep me company in my happiness !
and yet you leave her alone , up there in a strange house !
we discerned linton watching at the same spot he had selected before .
for the rain began to drive through the moaning branches of the trees , and warned us to avoid delay .
“ why ?
your love will make him an outcast and a beggar .
and you must have all the talk , and let me listen .
” i gasped .
i would not pass another winter here for much .
and you stealing off so !
“ this is your last ride , till papa comes back .
then there was a hubbub !
“ oh , dear , dear !
handsomer , possibly , and richer than he is .
it was not the case , in reality , i am aware ;
for two months the fugitives remained absent ;
before he could attempt to recover it , it was broken , and behind the fire .
” he cried ;
will he stay away many days ?
“ i didn’t touch you , you lying creature !
he is scarcely a degree dearer to her than her dog , or her horse .
miss has wasted too much time on you already :
i smelt the rich scent of the heating spices ;
and , if you do , what is it about ?
the father launched towards his son a glance of bitter contempt .
and do you imagine that beautiful young lady , that healthy , hearty girl , will tie herself to a little perishing monkey like you ?
“ how little did i dream that hindley would ever make me cry so !
” he added , turning to hareton .
it is folly dragging you from the hearth-stone , and pretending what do we pretend ?
and i presently saw she would have no more discretion in her friendship than she had in her hostility .
“ yours is a wicked man , ” retorted catherine ;
in the course of time mr earnshaw began to fail .
we didn’t care whether you kept with us or not ;
we had sad work with little cathy that day :
she was instantly upon her feet again , stretching to reach them :
“ go and carry my message , ” he interrupted , impatiently .
“ we’ll see , ” was her reply , and she set off at a gallop , leaving me to toil in the rear .
” said the young lady , scowling , and turning her face to the fire .
while i’m thinking of that i don’t feel pain .
“ and grief and disappointment are hastening his death .
and , though i’m used to being alone , i’d rather have some interesting company , if i can get it .
i uttered an expression of disgust , and pushed past him into the yard , running against earnshaw in my haste .
” i said ;
i assured her i would not scold , whatever her secret might be , and i guessed it , of course ;
he afterwards made joseph remove the body to his chamber , and told me to return to mine , and mrs heathcliff remained by herself .
she heard the men i sent disputing at the door , and she gathered the sense of heathcliff’s answer .
edgar must shake off his antipathy , and tolerate him , at least .
“ get away , now ;
but linton requires his whole stock of care and kindness for himself .
“ catherine , what have you done ?
“ not exactly from living among the hills and seeing one set of faces , and one series of actions , from year’s end to year’s end ;
“ i must stop it , nevertheless !
” he repeated , in a tone of mockery .
do !
i sat down in the porch and wept as for a blood relation , desiring mr kenneth to get another servant to introduce him to the master .
“ it is well you are out of my reach , ” he exclaimed .
and should she or any one else aggravate my anger at present , i shall get wild .
heathcliff , dear !
instead of finding her outside , i heard her voice within .
i’m going to tell it but take care not to smile at any part of it .
would you like to live with your soul in the grave ?
i wish it may prove true .
“ if you mean mr linton .
hasty footsteps approached my chamber door ;
earnshaw blushed crimson when his cousin made this revelation of his private literary accumulations , and stammered an indignant denial of her accusations .
do take some food , and some repose .
we thought a bolt had fallen in the middle of us ;
they wouldn’t let me go to the end of the garden wall .
i cannot conceive what he has been doing .
” i said , alarmed at his manner :
i proceeded to remove linton’s cap and mantle , and placed him on a chair by the table ;
“ still you have not told me , heathcliff , how catherine is left behind ?
though i was very sad for hindley’s sake .
joseph beheld my style of cookery with growing indignation .
come in and get shot , if you please .
you might as well leave a stranger with a brood of tigers !
the wind shifted from south to north-east , and brought rain first , and then sleet and snow .
” i whispered .
“ here’s a rahm , ” he said , at last , flinging back a cranky board on hinges .
our fiery catherine was no better than a wailing child .
i never will !
and allowed him to discover that you fretted over the separation he has judged it expedient to make .
but i compelled her to sit down on a chair , and made her drink , and washed her pale face , chafing it into a faint colour with my apron .
i refused to go without cathy ;
i set his plate to keep warm on the fender ;
he was , and is yet most likely , the wearisomest self-righteous pharisee that ever ransacked a bible to rake the promises to himself and fling the curses to his neighbours .
i’ll tell you , i do .
retracing the course of catherine linton , i fear we have no right to think she is ;
he might have had a monomania on the subject of his departed idol ;
ask him , ellen .
it terrified me .
“ yes , ” she answered ;
“ it has been revived , ” muttered cathy , sulkily .
and my account of catherine linton’s malady induced him to accompany me back immediately .
i do not know whether it was sorrow for him , but his cousin put on as sad a countenance as himself , and returned to her father .
“ there’s law in the land , thank god !
if he has , i must have been a baby .
he pointed into the second garret , only differing from the first in being more naked about the walls , and having a large , low , curtainless bed , with an indigo-coloured quilt , at one end .
” he pointed to a framed sheet hanging near the window , and continued , “ the crosses are for the evenings you have spent with the lintons , the dots for those spent with me .
and , moving nearer , i distinguished a tall man dressed in dark clothes , with dark face and hair .
1802 .
if he did overhear us , of course he’d never forgive you .
and there she was , just dismounted , and walking by its side .
and here !
both the expressions flitting over her face , and the changes of her moods , began to alarm me terribly ;
“ well , ” said the scoundrel , “ we’ll not argue the subject now :
“ why didn’t mamma and he live together , as other people do ?
hereafter , we must be cautious how we vex her .
get up !
“ i was not aware there were eavesdroppers , ” muttered the detected villain .
above which , among a wilderness of crumbling griffins and shameless little boys , i detected the date “ 1500 , ” and the name “ hareton earnshaw .
she had only lived there a year or two ;
” asked linton .
and instead , he sat down by the fire and swallowed gin or brandy by tumblerfuls .
“ i wink to see my father strike a dog or a horse , he does it so hard .
to you i’ve made myself worse than the devil .
and i proceeded assiduously with my occupation .
“ oh , but joseph will tell , ” she suggested ;
she did so to me , but i would not bear slapping and ordering ;
“ maister hindley !’ shouted our chaplain .
not from affection , but from pride :
sit down and take your dinner with us ;
that’s not the way :
“ it was .
“ is he not a handsome lad ?
“ you’ll surely not go out to-night , sir ?
“ i didn’t bid you good-night that evening , and i didn’t go to wuthering heights the next :
now would be the precise time to revenge myself on their representatives :
what do you talk about ?
the anguish he had exhibited on the moor subsided as soon as ever he entered wuthering heights ;
then i told her to hush , and not stir , for fear she should wake him .
however , in my dream , jabez had a full and attentive congregation ;
leaving aside the degradation of an alliance with a nameless man , and the possible fact that his property , in default of heirs male , might pass into such a one’s power , he had sense to comprehend heathcliff’s disposition :
if people be right to marry only for the present .
“ that heathcliff you recollect him , sir who used to live at mr earnshaw’s .
this lamentation drew no notice from me :
have you noticed , catherine , his frightful yorkshire pronunciation ?
but catherine called peevishly to me , “ ellen , shut the window .
“ silence !
every breath from the hills so full of life , that it seemed whoever respired it , though dying , might revive .
though knowing perfectly the hold he had on his heart , and conscious he had only to speak and all the house would be obliged to bend to his wishes .
“ mr heathcliff will have a long walk , wherever he may lodge to-night ;
as to your promise to marry linton , i’ll take care you shall keep it ;
“ an awful sunday , ” commenced the paragraph beneath .
“ i shall not stay .
it’s well people don’t really rise from their grave , or , last night , she might have witnessed a repulsive scene !
“ and the more ashamed , the more you know me ;
” i repeated , hastily .
“ here we have the whole establishment of domestics , i suppose , ” was the reflection suggested by this compound order .
“ quite sure , ” replied his cousin .
she sprang at her precious epistles , but i held them above my head ;
i’ll just fetch a little sewing , and then i’ll sit as long as you please .
“ since you are in the habit of passing dreadful nights , ” i said , “ it won’t be miss who spoils your ease :
not so mr edgar :
and i’ve made the attempt , but i dare not repeat it !
her aunt’s death impressed her with no definite sorrow she obliged me , by constant worrying , to walk with her down through the grounds to meet them .
i trembled lest he should send me to call her ;
“ he is afraid i shall laugh at him .
papa has forbidden me .
but i could see every pebble on the path , and every blade of grass , by that splendid moon .
i heard him snap his fingers .’ frances pulled his hair heartily , and then went and seated herself on her husband’s knee , and there they were , like two babies , kissing and talking nonsense by the hour foolish palaver that we should be ashamed of .
under these circumstances i remained solitary .
“ no , i’ll not promise , ” i repeated .
“ it is something to see you so near to my house , nelly .
” i shouted .
i was half inclined to make it try ;
for i had engaged to call again next day , when we quitted him ;
however , the dogs gave notice of my approach .
isabella linton is not to be compared with her , is she , frances ?
the poor thing couldn’t bear that ;
and my mind is so eternally secluded in itself , it is tempting at last to turn it out to another .
the black-currant trees were the apple of joseph’s eye , and she had just fixed her choice of a flower-bed in the midst of them .
“ oh , i’ll turn the talk on my landlord’s family !
“ mamma never told me i had a father .
if you enter the kirkyard , you’ll read , on his headstone , only that , and the date of his death .
she says you are a what was it ?
she did not yell out no !
he’ll think you are tired of waiting on him , and run off for a little amusement , ” answered heathcliff .
“ there’s heathcliff and a woman yonder , under t’ nab , ” he blubbered , “ un’ i darnut pass ’em .
many a window showed black gaps deprived of glass ;
“ i can’t say ,’ he answered ;
the other , introducing him to a table laid out by french cooks :
“ i thought it had been your cousin hareton , ” i observed to catherine .
the moment catherine left mr linton’s room she appeared at my bedside .
but he would be at thrushcross grange before morning .
my little mistress behaved like an angel in coming to wait on me , and cheer my solitude ;
“ stay where you are , ” i answered ;
the entire world is a dreadful collection of memoranda that she did exist , and that i have lost her !
“ but why , mr earnshaw ?
heathcliff had caught hold of her .
big enough both to walk and talk :
“ that man i’ve seen before .
you can bear plenty ;
earnshaw was not to be civilized with a wish , and my young lady was no philosopher , and no paragon of patience ;
i explained how he objected to the whole household at the heights , and how sorry he would be to find she had been there ;
and invent bugbear stories to terrify her from my door-stones ?
“ no , that won’t do , ” i said .
don’t be alarmed !
“ how long am i to wait ?
” inquired catherine , gazing curiously on the speaker .
but the master bid him get off to bed again :
“ afraid ?
but it is utterly impossible i can ever be revenged , and therefore i cannot forgive him .
mr linton had put on her pillow , in the morning , a handful of golden crocuses ;
” he said .
ye may hev’ it all to yerseln , un’ him as allas maks a third , i’ sich ill company !
“ mrs heathcliff is my daughter-in-law , ” said heathcliff , corroborating my surmise .
perhaps your envy counselled mr heathcliff to rob me of my treasures ?
“ i’s niver wonder but he’s at t’ bothom of a bog-hoile .
“ i’m very far from jesting , miss catherine , ” i replied .
i tell you i have nearly attained my heaven ;
with this intention , i turned and opened the panels .
on an afternoon in october , or the beginning of november a fresh watery afternoon , when the turf and paths were rustling with moist , withered leaves , and the cold blue sky was half hidden by clouds dark grey streamers , rapidly mounting from the west , and boding abundant rain i requested my young lady to forego her ramble , because i was certain of showers .
i obeyed ;
she entered and approached the hearth .
for the rest , after the first six months , she grew like a larch , and could walk and talk too , in her own way , before the heath blossomed a second time over mrs linton’s dust .
they never occupy my thoughts , except at the moment when i miss them .
“ not much , ” i answered :
wouldn’t it be wiser to bid him quit the house ?
i’d rather resign her to god , and lay her in the earth before me .
“ you know you mean no good .
but , instead of hindley , heathcliff appeared on the door-stones ;
you never harmed me in your life .
“ come in !
it ended .
but not then , in the presence of her corpse .
beside whom my master seemed quite slender and youth-like .
i was weeping as much for him as her :
he attempted to touch the child , who , on finding himself with me , sobbed off his terror directly .
and her husband was her cousin also :
being moved thereto by a mingled sense of curiosity and envy , that grew as i lingered .
“ the commonest occurrence startles her painfully , ” i said .
“ but deeds must prove it also ;
at present he’s discharged from the trouble of calling ;
i felt to him in such a variety of ways , that it would have been impossible to have accosted him rationally .
but ill luck would have it that , as he opened the door leading from the kitchen on one side , hindley opened it on the other .
only do it heartily , and not as if you thought her converted into a stranger by her grand dress .
and , as i wandered round , i heard another specimen of their civil behaviour amongst each other .
“ it was your servant zillah , ” i replied , flinging myself on to the floor , and rapidly resuming my garments .
but mrs linton , suspecting something , followed ;
and from what i heard , joseph contributed much to his deterioration , by a narrow-minded partiality which prompted him to flatter and pet him , as a boy , because he was the head of the old family .
joseph !
so i was indispensable at table .
small features , very fair ;
“ on the contrary , a tiresomely active one .
you may well be ashamed of them !
“ aunt isabella had not you and me to nurse her , ” i replied .
i tried to close his eyes :
she motioned me to admit him , but he found it out ere i could reach the door , and in a stride or two was at her side , and had her grasped in his arms .
and thrushcross park is the finest place in the world .
yet , certainly , he had a strange joyful glitter in his eyes , that altered the aspect of his whole face .
“ if you set store on him , you’d better be quiet .
i led my young lady out :
“ the sneaking rascal yonder .
one sunday evening , it chanced that they were banished from the sitting-room , for making a noise , or a light offence of the kind ;
a pious discourse delivered by the reverend jabez branderham , in the chapel of gimmerden sough .
joseph had instilled into him a pride of name , and of his lineage ;
zillah received me , and saying the lad was mending nicely ,’ showed me into a small , tidy , carpeted apartment , where , to my inexpressible joy , i beheld linton laid on a little sofa , reading one of my books .
mrs linton spoke strongly , and yet i can’t contradict her .
i hoped heartily we should have peace now .
but , as you stayed upstairs on the morrow , i escaped that trouble .
but i was strangely excited , and dreaded to hear that linton was dead , sometimes ;
“ if they were mine , they would be none the less that , ” said heathcliff ;
don’t you think hindley would be proud of his son , if he could see him ?
i asked , as he departed , if he went to gimmerton ?
mrs heathcliff’s lip quivered slightly , and she returned to her seat in the window .
oh , i’ve endured very , very bitter misery , nelly !
“ we have none , ” he answered ;
“ despise you ?
my walk home was lengthened by a diversion in the direction of the kirk .
disturbed her ?
his childhood’s sense of superiority , instilled into him by the favours of old mr earnshaw , was faded away .
“ it is twenty years , ” mourned the voice :
he was both dead and cold , and stark ;
mrs linton , on the third day , unbarred her door , and having finished the water in her pitcher and decanter , desired a renewed supply , and a basin of gruel , for she believed she was dying .
and i calls to earnshaw , when i come in eh , they’s queer things , mr hareton , happened since i went off .
happily , the architect had foresight to build it strong :
so saying , he lounged to the fire , and sat down .
pausing in her lamentations , she surveyed him with a glance of awe and horror , then burst forth anew .
as the guest answered nothing , but took his seat , and looked thoroughly indifferent what sentiments she cherished concerning him , she turned and whispered an earnest appeal for liberty to her tormentor .
hindley and i held it a favourite spot twenty years before .
i beg you will , unless you are tired of being received here , and wish linton to draw the bolts against you !
the ostler at a roadside public-house was holding a pail of water to refresh my horses , when a cart of very green oats , newly reaped , passed by , and he remarked , “ yon’s frough gimmerton , nah !
“ come in , that’s right !
and those and their position had charm enough to keep them unmoved till joseph came home .
“ as to staying here , i don’t keep accommodations for visitors :
“ young master is in the house ,’ said zillah , as she saw me making for the parlour .
i lingered round them , under that benign sky :
none could have noticed the exact minute of his death , it was so entirely without a struggle .
you are a castaway be off , or i’ll hurt you seriously !
look at little hareton !
“ how so ?
“ i won’t hear it , i won’t hear it !
his tone and look assured her he had not been the discoverer of the hoard .
what is his usual food , nelly ?
i can hardly regard her in the light of a rational creature , so obstinately has she persisted in forming a fabulous notion of my character and acting on the false impressions she cherished .
heathcliff had the key in his hand that remained on the table .
i’m sorry , too .
her cousin , after watching her endeavours a while , at last summoned courage to help her ;
“ there’s nobody here !
“ it’s some damnable writing , ” he answered .
mrs linton , at least , was scolding with renewed vigour ;
why , the man is mad !
and now , i must tell you , the winter will probably finish her .
i might set the things down and go .
and as to surprising her , i don’t desire it :
” said heathcliff , stretching out a hand and dragging him roughly between his knees , and then holding up his head by the chin .
he opened the gate himself and sauntered slowly up , probably enjoying the lovely afternoon that breathed as soft as summer .
“ you are sure nobody spoke ?
complying eagerly , i beheld hareton , laden with food enough to last me all day .
you and hareton may , if you please , accompany me :
“ well , don’t cry , ” replied catherine , contemptuously ;
” my suspense was truly painful ;
your welcome has put these ideas out of my mind ;
i was terrified at the devastation which had been accomplished in a brief half-hour ;
i couldn’t withhold giving some loose to my indignation ;
you’ll be spared to repent of your many injustices yet !
what you touch at present you may have ;
“ that is not my cousin , is he ?
” i asked , in order to rouse him ;
i saw him smile to himself grin rather and lapse into ominous musing whenever mrs linton had occasion to be absent from the apartment .
“ you shall account more clearly for keeping me ignorant of this !
the corner of linton’s mouth fell , and he took the sugar-candy from his lips .
“ why did you quarrel ?
however , if i am to follow my story in true gossip’s fashion , i had better go on ;
she’s here safe :
well , mr lockwood , i argued and complained , and flatly refused him fifty times ;
“ you’d better go !
he took the book from his hand , and glanced at the open page , then returned it without any observation ;
“ nor anything at all , then , my lady ?
desisting from it only to chide the servant for covering her with sparks , or to push away a dog , now and then , that snoozled its nose overforwardly into her face .
the evening of their expected arrival came .
“ no , reprobate !
” i demanded sternly , supposing i could frighten him into giving intelligence , by catching him thus , alone .
come , you shall take notice of me , hareton :
” he said .
that , however , which you may suppose the most potent to arrest my imagination , is actually the least :
“ and i pray that he may break your neck :
“ i shall be as dirty as i please :
“ good-bye , ellen !
“ oh , edgar darling !
ellen , show him down .
i have ordered supper at home .
and , in the morning , i often feel sick papa says i grow so fast .
“ that brute of a lad has warmed me nicely .
” i commenced again .
“ it must be more .
“ yes !
or nestling with closed lids , half thinking , half dreaming , happier than words can express .
and , as i fancied , by the motion of his arm’s shadow , dashing a tear from his eyes .
“ i should conjecture him to be far worse .
she grew white and red in rapid succession , and , while tears beaded her lashes , bent the strength of her small fingers to loosen the firm clutch of catherine ;
if the lad swore , he wouldn’t correct him :
“ she’s not accustomed to be spoiled not kept for a pet .
heathcliff pulled it away by main force , slitting up the flesh as it passed on , and thrust it dripping into his pocket .
i’m going out to seek your horses .
“ she was dumb .
you’ll be sick , keeping up so long , ellen .
“ did you want anything , ma’am ?
but the knock was repeated :
she was sick :
“ she did , she did , catherine !
i only wish us never to be parted :
there ensued a pause .
i made a motion to aid her ;
and how can i endure making him miserable when he when he mr heathcliff , let me go home !
” i inquired , still preserving my external composure , in spite of her ghastly countenance and strange , exaggerated manner .
“ i didn’t know you took my part , ” she answered , drying her eyes ;
but the poor dame had reason to repent of her kindness :
how can i tell whet ye say ?
and , nelly , mind you keep your word to-morrow .
she and edgar both lacked the ruddy health that you will generally meet in these parts .
un’ then we’s hear summut ;
i read in his countenance what anguish it was to offer that sacrifice to spleen .
“ she did !
because my mother had nursed mr hindley earnshaw , that was hareton’s father , and i got used to playing with the children :
we don’t in general take to foreigners here , mr lockwood , unless they take to us first .
i was laid alone , for the first time ;
trembling and bewildered , she held me fast , but the horror gradually passed from her countenance ;
for i saw little .
be a good lad ;
there , you won’t answer .
what malevolence you must have to wish to convince me that there is no happiness in the world !
it was not horror , it was covetousness .
“ and he wants me to sink into a dunce , meantime , ” answered catherine .
oh , my life !
and , repeating my waking meditations , i tracked his existence over again , with grim variations ;
“ i’ll not come here again !
she’s a beauty , it is true ;
don’t you see i can scarcely stand ?
it’s miserable !
which , however , he generously returned .
there is nothing in the world less yours than he is !
what has she been doing to you ?
love for my life urged a compliance ;
the pure heather-scented air , the bright sunshine , and the gentle canter of minny , relieved his despondency after a while .
spitting and cursing during the operation as energetically as he had kicked before .
poor papa !
she sometimes came into the kitchen all wildered like , and looked as if she would fain beg assistance ;
there he has continued , praying like a methodist :
no minister need come ;
and then ensued , from the stammering lips of the little fellow , a string of curses , which , whether he comprehended them or not , were delivered with practised emphasis , and distorted his baby features into a shocking expression of malignity .
how dreary to meet death , surrounded by their cold faces !
at which he immediately flung down his tools and accompanied me , in the office of watchdog , not as a substitute for the host .
but when we reached him , and that was scarcely a quarter of a mile from his own door , we found he had no horse ;
she pointed to hareton , the other individual , who had gained nothing but increased bulk and strength by the addition of two years to his age :
but its beginning was as friendless as its end is likely to be .
and you see yourself in it , and there am i too by your side .
you’ve not done right , have you , now ?
” she drew away her hand , and let it fall .
” i answered , tartly .
do you see ?
you seem damnably afraid !
i fancy he fretted a great deal , and moaned hisseln night and day ;
catherine caught and perused it eagerly ;
“ it’s noan nelly !
i felt i uttered my explanations awkwardly ;
in the midst of my agitation , i was sincerely glad to observe that catherine’s arms had fallen relaxed , and her head hung down .
how has he got rich ?
though he was compelled to retain the sentiment in his heart , because heathcliff plainly meant his underlings to hold him in honour .
he will , when he learns my true feelings towards him .
i entered ;
you know the terms we are on , i see :
indeed , we never went to bed ;
he would have more than any , but i , are aware of .
and she looks so pale and wild , i’m afraid of her .
he’s not a rough diamond a pearl-containing oyster of a rustic :
i don’t know him .
“ i want her to see linton , ” he answered ;
” demanded he of the shabby coat , shifting his ferocious gaze from me to the young lady .
i told the master he got rid of all decent people only to run to ruin a little faster ;
his mother wer just soa we wer a’most too mucky to sow t’ corn for makking her breead .
linton , don’t you recall your cousin , that you used to tease us so with wishing to see ?
and his agitation precluded further speech ;
“ one might suppose you had never opened a bible in your life .
she did not know , she answered :
though he’s been too wild for me this long while .
they’ll meet the fate of milo !
tell uncle i’m in tolerable health , will you ?
perceiving myself in a blunder , i attempted to correct it .
“ i suppose that’s the reason she would not go to bed .
we should never quarrel , should we , after we were used to each other ?
” she asked , gazing nervously round .
and he got cross again , and coughed , and returned to his chair .
bud yah’re a nowt , and it’s no use talking yah’ll niver mend o’yer ill ways , but goa raight to t’ divil , like yer mother afore ye !
“ when day breaks i’ll send for green , ” he said ;
“ but he shall answer for it .
you have a short memory .
so , correcting myself , i went on “ in spelling over the name scratched on that window-ledge .
“ who is that ?
“ you should have kept him out of sight :
not every morning , but once or twice a week .
“ i cannot sit in the kitchen .
the vehemence of my agitation brought on a copious bleeding at the nose , and still heathcliff laughed , and still i scolded .
but he was too much on the alert to be cheated :
the train-oil and gunpowder were shoved out of sight in a minute .
low and earnest , and wrung from the depth of his soul .
it is linton , i mean .
“ and what do you learn from daddy ?
the fire had smouldered to ashes ;
he stood a considerable period , viewing the carriage-road through the grounds ;
and mr heathcliff , aware of his absence , called rather earlier than usual .
her hope was that linton might be left with him , as he had been with her :
they were invisible :
“ i’ll not retract my word , ” said catherine .
heathcliff , having stared his son into an ague of confusion , uttered a scornful laugh .
the latter’s distraction at his bereavement is a subject too painful to be dwelt on ;
he poured it out , and handed me a cup .
but he never called it the name in full , as he had never called the first catherine short :
and i’ve often thought what a pleasure it would be to see its owner .
however , she shall not disturb you again ;
“ where else ?
i’ll not hurt you .
and perhaps you’ll get quieter when we leave you .
and the housekeeper received instructions to prepare some .
at length , i heard a footstep :
rather an aggravation of the constant torment i suffer :
but sit still and be dumb .
“ oh , he’ll do very well , ” said the master to me , after watching them a minute .
mrs linton , who was very much excited , bade me accompany her upstairs .
you’re saving , and i’m doing my little all that road .
i don’t believe he ever did speak a harsh word to her .
and we must pass by gimmerton kirk to go that journey !
there’s not another hoile to lig down in i’ th’ hahse !
i , for my part , began to fancy my forebodings were false , and that he must be actually rallying , when he mentioned riding and walking on the moors , and seemed so earnest in pursuing his object .
if you wash your face and brush your hair , it will be all right :
she stared , but soon comprehending why i counselled her to utter the falsehood , she assured me she would not complain .
dare you pretend to rouse him against me ?
“ there’s nobbut t’ missis ;
i did , though :
“ hush , this moment !
how life will be changed , how dreary the world will be , when papa and you are dead .
wait till i get hold of those elegant locks see if i won’t pull them a bit longer !
“ oh , if god would but give me strength to strangle him in my last agony , i’d go to hell with joy ,’ groaned the impatient man , writhing to rise , and sinking back in despair , convinced of his inadequacy for the struggle .
“ he lives a little distance from the grange , ” i replied ;
and i have only to do with the present .
ech !
” he answered .
i remember stopping to kick the breath out of him , and then hurrying upstairs , to my room and hers .
the nearer i got to the house the more agitated i grew ;
had i been a few hours sooner mrs linton’s illness might have arrested her rash step .
i obliged her to obey ;
” she cried , confounded .
and , as a last resource , cried , and said she was tired of living :
it was too late :
i hadn’t breath to explain ;
“ mr hareton will ask the master to send you upstairs , if you don’t behave !
edgar and his sister had it entirely to themselves .
“ it’s a blazing shame , that i cannot oppen t’ blessed book , but yah set up them glories to sattan , and all t’ flaysome wickednesses that iver were born into th’ warld !
when kenneth warned him that his medicines were useless at that stage of the malady , and he needn’t put him to further expense by attending her , he retorted , “ i know you need not she’s well she does not want any more attendance from you !
nelly , thy nurse .
it hurt me to think the master should be made uncomfortable by his own good deed .
the rascals knew that yesterday was my rent-day :
the consequence was , that it did not reach her before the lapse of three days .
there , to bed !
and not till after the coachman had been instructed to get ready , and a maid set to pack up some necessary attire , did i obtain her consent for binding the wound and helping to change her garments .
i got a book , and pretended to read .
he’s in my soul .
” even the gate over which he leant manifested no sympathising movement to the words ;
and i’m bitterly disappointed with the whey-faced , whining wretch !
however , mr heathcliff has claimed and kept them in his wife’s right and his also :
” she continued , kindling up .
she offered to give me them , and her pretty birds , and her pony minny , if i would get the key of our room , and let her out ;
then i clambered up the ladder to warn her .
she brought me some warm wine and gingerbread , and appeared exceedingly good-natured ;
come , come , be merry and like yourself !
“ but say whether i should have done so do !
“ and give him my thanks for permitting you to come my best thanks , catherine .
i began to feel unmistakably out of place in that pleasant family circle .
it formed to him a distinction from the mother , and yet a connection with her ;
divided into four hundred and ninety parts , each fully equal to an ordinary address from the pulpit , and each discussing a separate sin !
i would have asked why mrs dean had deserted the grange , but it was impossible to delay her at such a crisis , so i turned away and made my exit , rambling leisurely along , with the glow of a sinking sun behind , and the mild glory of a rising moon in front one fading , and the other brightening as i quitted the park , and climbed the stony by-road branching off to mr heathcliff’s dwelling .
but he yielded completely ;
“ well , we must not leave him asleep , ” i answered ;
yes , you may kiss me , and cry ;
he seemed estimating how far its owner would bear his intrusion .
she grew cross and wearisome ;
so he took it into his head to destroy my books .
i will ask what is the matter , i thought ;
instead of leaving catherine’s fortune at her own disposal , he determined to put it in the hands of trustees for her use during life , and for her children , if she had any , after her .
and he won’t always be handsome , and young , and may not always be rich .
he retained a great deal of the reserve for which his boyhood was remarkable ;
and i was never hired to serve you .
not heathcliff’s .
for the minute he discovered its existence he laid the blame on heathcliff’s deliberate designing .
” he exclaimed .
” i returned .
i held him till the fit exhausted itself .
the red fire-light glowed on their two bonny heads , and revealed their faces animated with the eager interest of children ;
in his last he recommended my jewel to be careful of his ;
and that , not because he’s handsome , nelly , but because he’s more myself than i am .
he lay on the heath , awaiting our approach , and did not rise till we came within a few yards .
” pursued the fellow , surveying the range of closed doors .
leaving joseph to explain matters , i ran to the children’s room :
my presence in his sanctum was evidently esteemed a piece of impudence too shameful for remark :
on the morrow of that monday , earnshaw being still unable to follow his ordinary employments , and therefore remaining about the house , i speedily found it would be impracticable to retain my charge beside me , as heretofore .
all you need do , is to wait well on your father , and cheer him by letting him see you cheerful ;
“ it is hills again , just like these .
he had bequeathed the whole of his , and what had been her , moveable property , to his father :
she bestowed seven or eight kisses on his cheek within the second , and then stopped , and drawing back , burst into a laugh , exclaiming , “ why , how very black and cross you look !
“ nay , you’ll be ashamed of me every day of your life , ” he answered ;
and so i’ll leave you to your rest , and go think it over .
we’s hear how it’s to be .
“ and who the devil gave you leave to touch a stick about the place ?
but you don’t know all , so don’t judge .
the master directed me to follow ;
had i expressed the agony i frequently felt , he would have been taught to long for its alleviation as ardently as i .
if i can only get this off ,’ i muttered , i wish they may shovel in the earth over us both !’ and i wrenched at it more desperately still .
but , with your leave , i’ll proceed in my own fashion , if you think it will amuse and not weary you .
and , he says , he and i must not play together , and threatens to turn him out of the house if we break his orders .
“ what !
but the lady’s glowed with another feeling when her friend appeared at the door :
the task was done , not free from further blunders ;
it is to amuse myself that i dwell on such subjects as the lack of external comforts :
for she flew off in the height of it , and locked herself up .
linton lay on the settle , sole tenant , sucking a stick of sugar-candy , and pursuing my movements with apathetic eyes .
i don’t want you , edgar :
“ it is strange , ” i began , in the interval of swallowing one cup of tea and receiving another “ it is strange how custom can mould our tastes and ideas :
hey , dog !
mr kenneth came to announce the event to my master .
and he pressed her not to go in again , but just mount his horse and away with him !
linton would have another , and after that another , notwithstanding my strenuous objections ;
and to say the truth i did the same ;
do you reflect that all those words will be branded in my memory , and eating deeper eternally after you have left me ?
” hindley put out his tongue , and cuffed him over the ears .
and , while i sobbed and listened , i could not help wishing we were all there safe together .
” i continued , with rising irritation .
he dragged me into the garden , pushed the lantern into my hand , assured me that mr earnshaw should be informed of my behaviour , and , bidding me march directly , secured the door again .
“ ah !
and god comforted him .
“ she’d be sadly grieved to hear you .
he says i mun do as i will .
the summer shone in full prime ;
i cannot look down to this floor , but her features are shaped in the flags !
” whispered catherine , “ i can’t go to wuthering heights :
“ now , mrs dean , ” zillah went on , seeing me not pleased by her manner , “ you happen think your young lady too fine for mr hareton ;
“ oh , heavens !
and i , in my secret heart (and conscience never reproached me) , thought what a blessing it would be for him should heathcliff put him out of misery ;
and , though i’m hardly a judge , i think that’s the worst motive you’ve given yet for being the wife of young linton .
“ it’s behind there still !
you would wish to see me sometimes , really ?
“ oh , nelly !
catherine walked in , and i stood waiting till she had conducted the invalid to a chair , expecting her out immediately ;
there , pale t’ guilp off , un’ then ye’ll hae done wi’t .
he opened a door , now and then , to look into the apartments we passed .
the stone struck my bonnet ;
yet i was glad at first she deserved punishing for pushing me :
i was obliged to confess , and in recompense for my cowardice and inhumanity was sent out of the house .
i know what there would be to do if they did not .
the ledge , where i placed my candle , had a few mildewed books piled up in one corner ;
i’ll interfere in no quarrels between you and nelly .
badly satisfied , cathy sat down , and he reclined beside her .
“ is she sane ?
on only one condition can i hope to forgive him .
you must have forgotten the contents of the book , and you may not have space to search it now .
“ then i shall go upstairs , ” i answered ;
my dear mother used to say i should never have a comfortable home ;
and i hope mr heathcliff will never get another tenant till the grange is a ruin , ” she answered , sharply .
leave me !
and he’s all you have akin in the wide world , that you will ever know remember .
“ i compliment you on your taste .
there he tore off the sleeve of earnshaw’s coat , and bound up the wound with brutal roughness ;
and above all , the speckless purity of my particular care the scoured and well-swept floor .
he laughed ;
and , to my agreeable disappointment , she behaved infinitely better than i dared to expect .
continual hard work , begun soon and concluded late , had extinguished any curiosity he once possessed in pursuit of knowledge , and any love for books or learning .
“ he thought me too poor to wed his sister , ” answered heathcliff , “ and was grieved that i got her :
i nobbut wish he may catch ye i’ that plisky .
he looks blooming to-day .
and that reminded him to order heathcliff a flogging , and catherine a fast from dinner or supper .
“ miss earnshaw ?
then , hatless and trembling with wrath , i ordered the miscreants to let me out on their peril to keep me one minute longer with several incoherent threats of retaliation that , in their indefinite depth of virulency , smacked of king lear .
something stirred in the porch ;
hareton , get forwards with the lass .
it makes a dog fiercer , and i love something fierce get me a scissors something fierce and trim !
he would have carried his delegated authority to the point of insisting that edgar linton should not be buried beside his wife , but in the chapel , with his family .
and then , linton would be nothing , nor hindley , nor all the dreams that ever i dreamt .
he was not pretty then , ellen :
it’s no use pouting and crying :
he was passing behind it , when hindley finished his speech by knocking him under its feet , and without stopping to examine whether his hopes were fulfilled , ran away as fast as he could .
i wonder his mother does not rise from her grave to see how you use him .
in an instant one was wrung free , and the astonished young man felt it applied over his own ear in a way that could not be mistaken for jest .
and he fixed on her features his raised eyes that seemed dilating with ecstasy .
” i said , endeavouring to snatch the glass from his hand .
what’s the matter ?
is he actually so utterly indifferent for my life ?
the sense of pleasure woke my instinct of self-preservation , so i fairly broke free ;
and , having scolded her heartily , threatened to send for the doctor .
“ i don’t know , ” she replied , casting a longing look to the door , and evidently eager to be active .
” said he , releasing me , “ i see that hideous little villain is not hareton :
the master seemed confounded a moment :
“ now , you go !
i believe i shall not live there any more .
“ did she die like a saint ?
she put the door gently to , slipped off her snowy shoes , untied her hat , and was proceeding , unconscious of my espionage , to lay aside her mantle , when i suddenly rose and revealed myself .
you have killed yourself .
” answered linton , snappishly .
“ are you going anywhere ?
it lies in a hollow , between two hills :
and yet i cannot continue in this condition !
” i exclaimed , concealing my joy under an angry countenance .
“ you had better sit down in there , and entrust your message to me .
yet i was a fool to fancy for a moment that she valued edgar linton’s attachment more than mine .
“ yes very foolish :
we looked at the windows they were too narrow for even cathy’s little figure .
“ after sitting still an hour , i looked at the great room with its smooth uncarpeted floor , and thought how nice it would be to play in , if we removed the table ;
“ ah !
only i made him impatient by speaking to him twice ;
“ must i close this ?
” the last reflection may seem conceited ;
the less you meddle with him the better .
he fair shaamed to ’bide still and see it .
speak , are you ?
i couldn’t bear to witness her sorrow :
“ i saw her at morn , ” he replied :
not loud , and still importunately .
“ what are ye for ?
“ none of your insolence before me !
“ indifferent , coming there .
“ i delivered catherine’s message .
i have not broken your heart you have broken it ;
” she asked , eagerly .
he’ll be gone to gimmerton , and he’ll stay there now .
she rang the bell till it broke with a twang ;
“ i must linton will be up immediately , ” persisted the alarmed intruder .
i’m not in such a hurry .
she rose in high glee , eager to join her cousin , and such passionate tears and lamentations followed the news of his departure that edgar himself was obliged to soothe her , by affirming he should come back soon :
and i yielded , in the faint hope that linton himself might prove , by his reception of us , how little of the tale was founded on fact .
“ i thought i liked you , though you were cross at first .
he thought we had grieved him some way .
i was not going there :
“ i’ve arranged to be accommodated there , for as long as i shall stay , ” i answered .
for the afternoon wore fast away , the man whom i had sent off returned from his errand , and i could distinguish , by the shine of the western sun up the valley , a concourse thickening outside gimmerton chapel porch .
well , it will teach me to be careful next time .
she was about to insist , when the entrance of joseph finished our conversation ;
i nursed her , poor thing !
“ she’s been fretting here , ” i continued , “ and eating scarcely anything , and never complaining :
take her into the garden , before you change your shoes ;
“ and you can get the key if you choose ?
he’d be capable of coming to seek me , to tease edgar .
but , as soon as he perceived her vacant seat , he sent me to call her .
and she commenced stroking his curls , and kissing his cheek , and offering him tea in her saucer , like a baby .
and at mrs earnshaw’s death , which happened in less than two years after , the young master had learned to regard his father as an oppressor rather than a friend , and heathcliff as a usurper of his parent’s affections and his privileges ;
it had appeared wrong to take the journey once ;
never a day ut yah’re off , but yon cat o’ linton comes sneaking hither ;
” then , striding to a side door , he shouted again , “ joseph !
“ you have grieved catherine :
“ persuade him !
happily , as mr heathcliff conjectured , he’ll not win twenty .
catherine , mrs linton heathcliff now , was suffered to stay at the grange till her father’s corpse had quitted it .
considering how heathcliff has reason to object to him , i’m sure he behaved excellently !
i cannot recognise any sentiment which those around share with me .
” she demanded , pushing the thick entangled locks from her wasted face .
“ because , ” he continued , looking at the two young people , who were fixed under his eye linton appeared as if he could not venture to stir or raise his head , and catherine could not move , on his account “ because that lad yonder seems determined to beat me ;
and on my giving chase , ran like a mouse over and under and behind the furniture , rendering it ridiculous for me to pursue .
through the whole night , and far into the morning , we heard him groaning and murmuring to himself .
for which deliverance we were very grateful .
miss catherine is a good girl :
you never shall , through my means .
“ my poor mistress is ill , and she quite masters me :
and , after all , i believe she meant no harm ;
they were silent their faces hid against each other , and washed by each other’s tears .
” i ejaculated , pushing through a gap which the man was repairing , and making straight to the high-road .
” she cried , reaching up to salute him .
yet she looks bravely , ” replied the girl , “ and she talks as if she thought of living to see it grow a man .
take a glass of wine ?
i took it from his hand , and touched the blade .
i thought he had not heard aught , so i told him the rumour .
next to papa and ellen , i love you better than anybody living .
edgar , though he felt for the boy , could not consent to grant his request ;
i wished to have the c .
but , repenting half-way , i returned softly , and lo !
i’m tired of being enclosed here .
“ oh , dear !
and , in a fortnight more , i got a long letter , which i considered odd , coming from the pen of a bride just out of the honeymoon .
“ injured !
i have done , and yield the argument to your saucy insolence .
as she kissed me , her lips felt like ice .
he saw the master first , and made a hasty motion that she should be silent ;
there are only a few red ashes now .
how have i treated you infernally ?
” i insisted .
” i pursued .
nelly , you are not glad !
i felt my heels and coat-laps peculiar subjects of assault ;
we always ate our meals with mr heathcliff .
her breath was stifled by sobs .
heathcliff went up once , to show her linton’s will .
it affected him too deeply to allow an observation on the subject that night .
she held her hand interposed between the furnace-heat and her eyes , and seemed absorbed in her occupation ;
to live all these years such close neighbours , and never see us , is odd :
linton , on the contrary , displayed the true courage of a loyal and faithful soul :
i cannot manage her at all ;
, and on the south-west , t .
“ quietly as a lamb !
and i , pleased with her agility and her light , childish heart , still considered it proper to scold every time i caught her at such an elevation , but so that she knew there was no necessity for descending .
catherine will tell you that i that i have been cheerful .
she wrote to inform her brother of the probable conclusion of a four-months’ indisposition under which she had suffered , and entreated him to come to her , if possible ;
and , if you do as he wishes , you shall return home next day , and take me with you .
one is gold put to the use of paving-stones , and the other is tin polished to ape a service of silver .
“ at last , one night she came boldly into my chamber , and frightened me out of my wits , by saying , tell mr heathcliff that his son is dying i’m sure he is , this time .
perhaps we might contrive to get through the window there , or into a garret , and out by its skylight .
“ she’s dead !
for a girl of twenty-two it was not injudicious .
i was not as ill when you entered as i am at present was i ?
are you as soft as your brother ?
who’s given us the slip now , do you think ?
but , ere she had well secured it , he seized her with the liberated hand , and , pulling her on his knee , administered with the other a shower of terrific slaps on both sides of the head , each sufficient to have fulfilled his threat , had she been able to fall .
one could guess by her white face and heavy eyes .
and there she’ll see linton , and all will be told as soon as ever we return ;
i shall be sorry that i must leave them !’ will you say so , heathcliff ?
i stood outside the chamber-door a quarter of an hour , and hardly ventured near the bed , then .
she sprang forward , took both his hands , and led him to linton ;
tell your master , nelly , that i never , in all my life , met with such an abject thing as she is .
sometimes , while meditating on these things in solitude , i’ve got up in a sudden terror , and put on my bonnet to go see how all was at the farm .
“ he is not aware of what i suffer , ” she replied .
“ i shall , ” said catherine .
and once , hareton , i came upon a secret stock in your room some latin and greek , and some tales and poetry :
his features were pretty yet , and his eye and complexion brighter than i remembered them , though with merely temporary lustre borrowed from the salubrious air and genial sun .
the same bloodless hue , and his teeth visible , now and then , in a kind of smile ;
it fair brusts my heart !
i’ll continue it in her own words , only a little condensed .
do look !
these three awful nights i’ve never closed my lids and oh , i’ve been tormented !
hareton was impressed with a wholesome terror of encountering either his wild beast’s fondness or his madman’s rage ;
” i pursued .
“ no , ” she repeated , and continued sauntering on , pausing at intervals to muse over a bit of moss , or a tuft of blanched grass , or a fungus spreading its bright orange among the heaps of brown foliage ;
she now put no further restraint on her tears ;
“ first and foremost , do you love mr edgar ?
in two hours , i called joseph to carry him up again ;
the cowardly children crept nearer also , isabella lisping frightful thing !
his efforts redoubling the more imminently his avaricious and unfeeling plans were threatened with defeat by death .
what use were anger and protestations against her silly credulity ?
i performed the duty of a faithful servant in telling you , and i have got a faithful servant’s wages !
hareton earnshaw that is , miss cathy’s other cousin , and so yours in a manner will show you all the sweetest spots ;
“ her senses never returned :
i watched them , from the window , walk down the garden .
and linton sat in the arm-chair , and i in the little rocking chair on the hearth-stone , and we laughed and talked so merrily , and found so much to say :
“ i’ll tell him that you say so , linton .
gradually , however , they expanded into copious love-letters , foolish , as the age of the writer rendered natural , yet with touches here and there which i thought were borrowed from a more experienced source .
“ and did she ever mention me ?
she refused , and he he struck her down , and wrenched it off the chain , and crushed it with his foot .
“ i have waited here an hour , ” he resumed , while i continued staring ;
somebody must go , ” murmured mrs heathcliff , more kindly than i expected .
where did she pick up this companion ?
there , john , fasten the chain .
at least , he guesses that only mr hindley would be up ;
and she seemed to speak sincerely .
the bog-water got into her head , and she would have run home quite flighty , but i fixed her till she came round to her senses .
if yah dunnut loike wer company , there’s maister’s ;
i sud ha’ taen tent o’ t’ maister better nor him and he warn’t deead when i left , naught o’ t’ soart !
the housekeeper , a matronly lady , taken as a fixture along with the house , could not , or would not , comprehend my request that i might be served at five) on mounting the stairs with this lazy intention , and stepping into the room , i saw a servant-girl on her knees surrounded by brushes and coal-scuttles , and raising an infernal dust as she extinguished the flames with heaps of cinders .
“ tut , tut !
” and , thenceforth , the little boy came with vacant pockets .
” she exclaimed , energetically .
“ drag her away !
i started .
for he was conscious of being insulted , and embarrassed how to resent it .
chafing her hands together , and frowning .
” i demanded .
and she esteemed herself a woman , and our mistress , and thought that her recent illness gave her a claim to be treated with consideration .
what would mr linton say if he heard you ?
” she said , having doubtfully surveyed , first one and then the other .
” she sobbed , as mrs linton left the room .
decide !
all was composed , however :
“ my dear young lady , ” i exclaimed , “ i’ll stir nowhere , and hear nothing , till you have removed every article of your clothes , and put on dry things ;
“ it was monday evening , ” i replied , “ and this is thursday night , or rather friday morning , at present .
he had fallen asleep .
it was a strange way of killing :
you needn’t be so disturbed .
if i pitied you for crying and looking so very frightened , you should spurn such pity .
you’d not provoke me , and you’d always be ready to help me , wouldn’t you ?
he cunningly conjectured they were staying away in order to avoid hearing his protracted blessing .
“ miss cathy , ” i interrupted , “ it will be three hours instead of one that we are out , presently .
“ i knew mrs linton’s nature to be headstrong and domineering , ” cried i :
it is to be carried to the churchyard in the evening .
“ to be sure , considering the exhibition you performed in his presence this afternoon , i might say it would be wise to refuse him :
the ascent to his garret , i suppose .
her mind had strayed to other associations .
and i said my old master and foster-brother had a claim on my services as strong as his own .
but could not stir a limb ;
“ i’ve treated you infernally and you’ll take your revenge !
the confinement brought me exceedingly low .
is he injured anywhere ?
we tried the kitchen door , but that was fastened outside :
its result was disappointment , and joseph’s quest ended in the same .
still , he didn’t molest her :
where indeed it belonged , as she well knew .
and i know it by this :
it is probable mr heathcliff proposed going from summer to summer , but never found a convenient opportunity ;
he said he wouldn’t suffer a word to be uttered in his disparagement :
that his soul was abandoned to perdition ;
and when i would have gone in , your little boy played sentinel over the place , and frightened me off by the help of a bull-dog .
“ mrs heathcliff ?
for june found him still declining .
and he ought to and must inquire how the property was left , and look over the concerns of his brother-in-law .
intelligence of mr hindley’s arrival drove linton speedily to his horse , and catherine to her chamber .
there was miss standing at the table with a bit of blank paper before her and a pencil in her hand , which she guiltily slipped out of sight on my entrance .
i flung her back , and hastened to interpose the table between us .
“ treachery and violence are a just return for treachery and violence !’ cried hindley .
i departed to renew my search ;
yes , yes , he’s rich enough to live in a finer house than this :
“ no !
“ open that door he’s in there .
and , by degrees , i smuggled over a great number of books , and other articles , that had formed her amusement at the grange ;
“ why have you that silk frock on , then ?
i said she was my daughter-in-law :
we broke in this morning , for we heard him snorting like a horse ;
it was zillah ;
then i put her through the following catechism :
kiss me , hareton !
“ oh , i will die , ” she exclaimed , “ since no one cares anything about me .
and she beguiled hareton , who had perfectly recovered from his accident , to dig and arrange her little garden , which was shifted to that corner by the influence of joseph’s complaints .
“ there’s this to do ,’ thundered heathcliff , that your master’s mad ;
and , hard though it be to crush her buoyant spirit , i must persevere in making her sad while i live , and leaving her solitary when i die .
mrs linton sat down by the fire , flushed and gloomy .
unnatural cub , come hither !
i wouldn’t be there , and my fellow-servants should be equally out of the way .
i heard joseph read on a while afterwards ;
and for edgar’s sake , too , to satisfy him .
“ i took hold of linton’s hands , and tried to pull him away ;
“ and i shudder at you !
whence , after putting on dry clothes , and pacing to and fro thirty or forty minutes , to restore the animal heat , i adjourned to my study , feeble as a kitten :
” cried catherine , when her cousin returned .
“ and so ye’ve been murthering on him ?’ exclaimed joseph , lifting his hands and eyes in horror .
i suffered her to enjoy it a while ;
oh , boy !
“ not at all answer .
” observed kenneth , interrogatively .
she refused ;
“ i shall have a pretty story to tell to-night ;
joseph stood by his master’s chair telling some tale concerning a lame horse ;
but he had a tiresome cough , and looked feverish and ill , so i did not rebuke his temper .
that was his most perfect idea of heaven’s happiness :
clear you too quite from my reach and hearing .
at learning the chance we had missed , we both gave vent to our grief without control ;
“ heathcliff gave him a push on to his knees in the middle of the blood , and flung a towel to him ;
” asked miss cathy , seriously ;
some locks hanging lankly down , and some carelessly twisted round her head .
i don’t fear that she will go wilfully wrong ;
kissing her cheek , he murmured , “ i am going to her ;
indeed , he would have carpeted and papered a small spare room for a parlour ;
the comfort which the eye derives from it renders the extra heat endurable .
“ oh , don’t , don’t go .
“ you may see some ;
hareton earnshaw , who lives with mr heathcliff ?
this visitation worn’t for nowt , and i wod hev’ ye to look out , miss yah muh be t’ next .
he knaws ay , he knaws , as weel as i do , who sud be t’ maister yonder ech , ech , ech !
perceiving it vain to argue against her insanity , i was planning how i could reach something to wrap about her , without quitting my hold of herself (for i could not trust her alone by the gaping lattice) , when , to my consternation , i heard the rattle of the door-handle , and mr linton entered .
but i’ll give you a feeling of how i feel .
not right ?
she could neither lay nor control it .
i quickly released the animal , and lifted it into the garden .
a perfect misanthropist’s heaven and mr heathcliff and i are such a suitable pair to divide the desolation between us .
you say you don’t expect them back for some time the young people ?
but i was summoned back by a piercing shriek the shawl had dropped from the frame .
i’m not going to act the lady among you , for fear i should starve .
edgar linton had his head laid on the pillow , and his eyes shut .
a formal walk which she generally affected if low-spirited and that she invariably was when mr edgar had been worse than ordinary , a thing never known from his confession , but guessed both by her and me from his increased silence and the melancholy of his countenance .
linton was very reluctant to be roused from his bed at five o’clock , and astonished to be informed that he must prepare for further travelling ;
” she once asked .
we calculate it will scarcely last till it is eighteen .
it was eleven o’clock , and i announced my intention of going in and waiting for him ;
one or two heavy black ones lurking in the shade .
linton here started from his slumber in bewildered terror , and asked if any one had called his name .
i have to remind myself to breathe almost to remind my heart to beat !
nor for his taking her from me , if he could console her for my loss .
i had brought some of my nicest books for him :
their guest did not protract his stay that evening above an hour longer .
“ you must be hungry , rambling about all night !
he seized his stick to strike him , and shook with rage that he could not do it .
“ missis walked in , ” she said , “ as chill as an icicle , and as high as a princess .
i’m jealous of monopolising his affection .
they brought word that catherine was ill :
“ has he ever seen me ?
“ papa says you are a wicked man , and you hate both him and me ;
“ well , i won’t repeat my offer of a wife :
and mr linton mixed a tumbler of negus , and isabella emptied a plateful of cakes into her lap , and edgar stood gaping at a distance .
i’m glad , for i shall be master of the grange after him .
anxiously watched by my employer .
“ no ;
your wife , most likely , is convinced you are mad ;
there is himself , earnshaw , zillah , joseph and i .
that will be a novelty :
and would it not be foolish to mourn a calamity above twenty years beforehand ?
and the full , mellow flow of the beck in the valley came soothingly on the ear .
“ sir , ” i exclaimed , “ sitting here within these four walls , at one stretch , i have endured and forgiven the four hundred and ninety heads of your discourse .
“ unless in dreams .
has papa been , ellen ?
call me two men out of the hall , ellen .
“ papa told me ;
“ there’s a tigress !
i’ll not promise to keep them .
“ nice words to be used to a young lady !
“ sit down and take your hat off , catherine ,’ he answered .
and , at last , hindley in a passion told us to bolt the doors , and swore nobody should let them in that night .
he seemed ready to tear catherine in pieces , and i was just worked up to risk coming to the rescue , when of a sudden his fingers relaxed ;
i could ;
notwithstanding the doctor’s prophecy , i am rapidly recovering strength ;
i call her a darling , and flatter her into a good temper .
never ?
and feeling as confident that catherine’s first thought on her father’s return would be to seek an explanation of the latter’s assertion concerning her rude-bred kindred .
i’ve no more business to marry edgar linton than i have to be in heaven ;
and , as he had no surname , and we could not tell his age , we were obliged to content ourselves with the single word , “ heathcliff .
her father-in-law went up , held the light to linton’s face , looked at him , and touched him ;
for i keep it yet .
oh , mamma , come here .
i was often wretched all the time .
was he not a fool ?
i wouldn’t have run till i’d seen him all but demolished , had hindley been able to do it !
i’m sure i should be myself were i once among the heather on those hills .
they’ll be naught but lumps as big as my neive .
“ but wisht , old man , and read your bible like a christian , and never mind me .
and i thought he never looked better .
my heart invariably cleaved to the master’s , in preference to catherine’s side :
a ray fell on his features ;
and to ask if anything that i could do would be of use to her .
and eyes , had they been agreeable in expression , that would have been irresistible :
and i’m certain he would be fit to turn him out of doors , if he knew half the nursing he gives hisseln .
his nephew’s offering of thanks was duly delivered , miss cathy gently touching on the rest :
i thought , if i had caused the cloud , it was my duty to make an effort to dispel it .
pitiful lath of a crater !
we were recalled by a scream .
the clouds appeared inclined to thunder , and i said we had better all sit down ;
and if he had been in my place , he would be more the master of the grange than your father by this time .
but i’m glad it isn’t the master .
he would , had he dared , have fostered hate between him and the present owner of the heights :
“ by no means !
and that poor lad ’ll be lost atween ye .
“ a terribly lazy mood , i should say .
she expressed pleasure , too , at finding a sister among her new acquaintance ;
“ you accepted him !
but would she love me ?
and you’ll need half-an-hour’s donning .
“ as everybody loves you’re silly , nelly .
“ hallo , nelly !
” said her sister-in-law .
” i asked , imploringly .
i shall be sorry for you .
and under pretence of gaining information concerning the necessities of my establishment , i desired mrs dean , when she brought in supper , to sit down while i ate it ;
and , in my terror , i let the candle bend towards the wall , and it left me in darkness .
i was cross and low ;
they had invited them to spend the morrow at wuthering heights , and the invitation had been accepted , on one condition :
they are just at the corner , by the stand of hives .
but time was more potent ;
however , the other stopped all demonstrations , at once , by placing the lifeless-looking form in his arms .
the surprise petrified her an instant :
the insulted visitor moved to the spot where he had laid his hat , pale and with a quivering lip .
“ and cried for mamma at every turn , ” i added , “ and trembled if a country lad heaved his fist against you , and sat at home all day for a shower of rain .
“ you’ll be content with the cushion , master heathcliff .
“ i depart again to-morrow .
” she asked .
“ you bring the pony , ” she exclaimed , turning to the woman , “ and let my dog free this moment !
it would do you a great deal of good :
“ mrs heathcliff , ” i said earnestly , “ you must excuse me for troubling you .
“ it’s your father’s , isn’t it ?
you said i killed you haunt me , then !
“ stand on your feet .
but that was impossible :
i fell to work with my hands ;
“ now , now , idiot !
and into the stable to see your horse .
last winter , i did not think , at another twelve months’ end , i should be amusing a stranger to the family with relating them !
but he was really half dead with fatigue , and all that i could make out , amongst her scolding , was a tale of his seeing it starving , and houseless , and as good as dumb , in the streets of liverpool , where he picked it up and inquired for its owner .
you have something the matter with you now !
the lands , being a minor , he could not meddle with .
“ i’ll make up my mind on that point by to-morrow , miss catherine , ” i replied .
“ did she say she was grieved ?
she’s sorry she ever came home , i daresay !
she did !
he afterwards gathered the books and hurled them on the fire .
” i exclaimed , touching her shoulder ;
i’ll read it :
he spoke in the deep tenderness of one about to leave his treasure amid perils and foes , where his remembered words would be the only aid that he could bequeath to guide her .
“ it is for god to punish wicked people ;
and , perhaps , not quite awake to what he did , but attracted like a child to a candle , at last he proceeded from staring to touching ;
“ oh dear , i don’t wonder !
this is certainly a beautiful country !
“ have you been listening at the door , edgar ?
no ;
yet , still , i don’t like being out in the dark now ;
but he knew the people we were coming amongst , and he did not fear their intermeddling .
” added catherine , interrogatively .
and shoo’ll not oppen ’t an ye mak’ yer flaysome dins till neeght .
“ what are you doing there , nelly ?
“ yet , for my sake , you must be friends now .
then the woman-servant brought a basin of warm water , and washed her feet ;
“ and with the greatest pleasure , provided you’ll leave me alone :
“ if linton died , ” i answered , “ and his life is quite uncertain , catherine would be the heir .
having rested awhile , i directed my servant to inquire the way to the village ;
” and he began to wail aloud , for very pity of himself .
“ ah !
“ that is quite possible , ” remarked heathcliff , forcing himself to seem calm :
and you point out any charm it could have had for you .
the two , to a cool spectator , made a strange and fearful picture .
do i want to live ?
“ but i know edgar is in bed , and i cannot stop myself .
she sat till noon , and would still have remained brooding over that deathbed , but i insisted on her coming away and taking some repose .
he will he must live as long as i do .
but be generous , and contrive to see him .
“ i didn’t , ” sobbed the youth , escaping from my hands , and finishing the remainder of the purification with his cambric pocket-handkerchief .
“ to walk four miles would kill me .
with reason i imagined , for he was kind , and trustful , and honourable ;
” i ejaculated .
as i reached them , hindley leant forward on the rails to listen to a noise below ;
and papa swore it was owing to me :
and his money and time being both limited , he thought it better to take it home with him at once , than run into vain expenses there :
we can’t stop to watch him .
but let her have quiet , and proper attendance , and she’ll rally .
nor did i pay much attention to the sighs of my master , who yearned to hear his lady’s name , since he might not hear her voice .
and was passing through the hall with it in my hand , when a sharp knock at the front door made me jump .
and she grew serious for an instant , scrutinizing him with deep gravity .
we had just agreed the best destiny which could await catherine would be a permission to continue resident at the grange ;
” with this intention i asked mrs dean why heathcliff let thrushcross grange , and preferred living in a situation and residence so much inferior .
” cried his father .
and perceiving that as fast as she raised one finger off her arm another closed down , and she could not remove the whole together , she began to make use of her nails ;
i can hardly understand him , i’m sure !
and don’t look so silly , now !
i relinquished my labour of agony , and turned consoled at once :
he turned , as he spoke , a peculiar look in her direction :
would that he could be blotted out of creation , and out of my memory !
and that scheme it does not come within my province to arrange .
and then his cheek was often flushed , and his eyes were bright ;
while saying this he took a pint bottle of brandy from the dresser , and poured some into a tumbler .
i must make the little parlour my sitting-room , and keep her with me .
i shall die !
and , one day , i had the misfortune , when she had provoked me exceedingly , to lay the blame of his disappearance on her :
i’m not wandering :
he might well skulk behind the settle , on beholding such a bright , graceful damsel enter the house , instead of a rough-headed counterpart of himself , as he expected .
with force she would have found it impossible .
“ he has stayed at home , ” i thought , “ and he’ll be all right to-day .
consent , or refuse , i will see her !
but i believe at wuthering heights the kitchen is forced to retreat altogether into another quarter :
” cried catherine ;
the difference between him and the others forced me to be less partial .
“ very old , sir ;
“ she cried when i told her you were off again this morning .
go upstairs ;
he and joseph were conversing about some farming business ;
now , catherine , you are letting your tears fall into my cup .
and every circumstance that took place about her :
it’s hard work bringing them through fevers , and such things .
“ i’ll go with him as far as the park , ” he said .
, and linton didn’t like it .
the doctor , on examining the case for himself , spoke hopefully to him of its having a favourable termination , if we could only preserve around her perfect and constant tranquillity .
but hindley hated him :
and if she be motionless , it is sleep .’ i got a spade from the tool-house , and began to delve with all my might it scraped the coffin ;
she richly deserves it .
after playing lady’s-maid to the new-comer , and putting my cakes in the oven , and making the house and kitchen cheerful with great fires , befitting christmas-eve , i prepared to sit down and amuse myself by singing carols , all alone ;
i can afford to suffer anything hereafter !
“ we were quarrelling like cats about you , heathcliff ;
till he grew irritable , and got up , asking why i would not allow him to have his own time in taking his meals ?
dear ellen , it begins , i came last night to wuthering heights , and heard , for the first time , that catherine has been , and is yet , very ill .
it was enough if he were obliged to see her once or twice a day .
and ellen , who is in league with you , and yet pretended to pity me so , when i kept hoping , and was always disappointed about linton’s coming back !
he perceives his delicate constitution , and the necessity of treating him tolerably .
whear the hell wold ye gang ?
“ so you may as well sit down .
nelly , i see now you think me a selfish wretch ;
and before i went home , i was encouraged so far as to volunteer another visit to-morrow .
it had got dusk , and the moon looked over the high wall of the court , causing undefined shadows to lurk in the corners of the numerous projecting portions of the building .
he’ll return with a brace of pistols and half-a-dozen assistants .
yah muh goa back whear yah coom frough .
and , finding it useless to attempt shaking the creature off , i pulled its wrist on to the broken pane , and rubbed it to and fro till the blood ran down and soaked the bedclothes :
with the exception of her conversations with her cousin , and any mention of hareton .
he flung it off , and muttered , if she did not give over , he would break her neck .
“ you should not have come out , ” she said , rising and reaching from the chimney-piece two of the painted canisters .
“ i could do as well without his approbation .
” he interrupted , reddening .
i knew no living thing in flesh and blood was by ;
he wanted no women in the house , he said , now that there was no mistress ;
if possible , still more disagreeably than before .
“ who was it ?
i commenced a soothing speech , but could not stay his hand :
michael came to ask if he must saddle minny ;
hareton , you infernal calf , begone to your work .
and she put all of us past our patience fifty times and oftener in a day :
i don’t hate you .
“ and she loved mine , ” added he .
she placed one she had been perusing on his hand ;
and became daily more notable for savage sullenness and ferocity .
you’re tired of being banished from the world , are you ?
not fear of the thunder , surely ?
the minute after , she had sidled to him , and was sticking primroses in his plate of porridge .
” she cried .
i listened , and tossed about , and , finally , dressed and descended .
his lack of interest in the subjects she started , and his equal incapacity to contribute to her entertainment , were so obvious that she could not conceal her disappointment .
and i tried to smooth away all disquietude on the subject , by affirming , with frequent iteration , that that betrayal of trust , if it merited so harsh an appellation , should be the last .
“ why cannot you say at once you don’t want me ?
i did give him some lessons about snivelling .
” she gasped .
catherine , contented at first , in a brief space grew irritable and restless .
catherine linton (the very name warms me) , my bonny lass , i shall be from home all this week ;
“ no !
we have done nothing to deserve this separation ;
“ i disturbed nobody , nelly , ” he replied ;
i wonder what lies on the other side is it the sea ?
but did it never strike you that if heathcliff and i married , we should be beggars ?
“ contrary , then , ” answered another , in deep but softened tones .
it’s a rough journey , and a sad heart to travel it ;
there was silence , and then a cry , oh , mamma , mamma !
and what do you suppose the master will think when i display it before him ?
” i continued , turning to an obscure cushion full of something like cats .
i guess by her silence , as much as anything , what she feels .
here , take a little wine .
she was struck during a tempest of passion with a kind of fit .
my soul’s bliss kills my body , but does not satisfy itself .
there is ;
i gave michael books and pictures to prepare minny every evening , and to put her back in the stable :
“ while they examined me , cathy came round ;
but i begin to fancy you don’t like me .
“ if i had been , i would have set my signet on the biter .
what !
i was moved to rise and denounce jabez branderham as the sinner of the sin that no christian need pardon .
he muttered something inaudible .
if you have any kisses to spare , give them to linton :
he’s coming .
he divined that one of his enemy’s purposes was to secure the personal property , as well as the estate , to his son :
“ why , what is the matter ?
or else lay in bed all day :
” shouted joseph , as he slowly drew off .
there were no signs of his coming , however , and at last the children got tired of running down to the gate to look .
he has an honourable soul , and a true one , or how could he remember her ?
you used to , you know , ellen .
all was silence .
how many years do you mean to live after i am gone ?
or reading sermons , and being catechised by their man-servant , and set to learn a column of scripture names , if they don’t answer properly ?
and where is phoenix ?
brethren , execute upon him the judgment written .
and on mr heathcliff’s taking a seat and bidding him “ come hither ” he hid his face on my shoulder and wept .
“ walk out of the room ,’ cried the master , and let me never hear a word more about him !
so we climbed the slope of heath together .
as i discovered , on endeavouring to introduce to him a private mess of victuals .
i heard , and not altogether disapprovingly , a manual check given to her saucy tongue .
” replied i with decision .
“ you are the proper person to ask me .
as i spoke , i observed a large dog lying on the sunny grass beneath raise its ears as if about to bark , and then smoothing them back , announce , by a wag of the tail , that some one approached whom it did not consider a stranger .
it used to hang on one side , and his wife’s on the other ;
she seemed almost over-fond of mr linton ;
i stared full at him , and laughed scornfully .
whatever he may pretend , he wishes to provoke edgar to desperation :
they sat together in a window whose lattice lay back against the wall , and displayed , beyond the garden trees , and the wild green park , the valley of gimmerton , with a long line of mist winding nearly to its top (for very soon after you pass the chapel , as you may have noticed , the sough that runs from the marshes joins a beck which follows the bend of the glen) .
isabella swears that the love edgar has for me is nothing to that she entertains for you .
the luckless adventure made earnshaw furious .
ye’ve seen all but hareton’s bit of a cham’er .
i have not written my will yet ;
does he niver say nowt of his fine living amang us , when he goes to t’ grange ?
she seemed pleased at this arrangement ;
they forgot everything the minute they were together again :
and feeling very mean and malignant , i skulked round to seek refuge in the kitchen .
her magnanimity provoked his tears :
but he brought it back immediately , with the supper-tray in his other hand , explaining that mr heathcliff was going to bed , and he wanted nothing to eat till morning .
i never dreamt of his dying !
and take him with me :
why does my blood rush into a hell of tumult at a few words ?
i’ll run down and secure my guest .
“ my father !
edgar stood on the hearth weeping silently , and in the middle of the table sat a little dog , shaking its paw and yelping ;
it was so tiresomely pertinacious that i resolved on requesting leave to go to wuthering heights , and assist in the last duties to the dead .
he’s a grand lad !
and now it is too late .
a high wind blustered round the house , and roared in the chimney :
there shall be an explanation as soon as i can give it ;
doubtless catherine marked the difference between her friends , as one came in and the other went out .
” he said to earnshaw .
i trotted up their garden , and was turning round to the back , when that fellow earnshaw met me , took my bridle , and bid me go in by the front entrance .
this is t’ way on ’t :
“ a man’s life is of more consequence than one evening’s neglect of the horses :
he was unfit for attending to such matters then , but he bid me speak to his lawyer ;
“ yes , yes , we can !
and watching her , my pet and my delight , with her golden ringlets flying loose behind , and her bright cheek , as soft and pure in its bloom as a wild rose , and her eyes radiant with cloudless pleasure .
i held no communication with him ;
she did bring herself , finally , to confess , and to confide in me :
” thundered heathcliff with savage vehemence .
if you don’t let me in , i’ll kill you !’ he rather shrieked than said .
but getting out of breath , he finally desisted , and dragged the apparently inanimate body on to the settle .
that’s fine gratitude , is it not ?
it was rather a rough mess , i own , when poured into the basins ;
“ catherine !
the rumour goes , ” he added , in a lower tone , “ that edgar linton is on his death-bed :
it followed fast on his sister’s :
it is mine , at present ;
most likely he supposed that i was inclined to shirk my promise , and so resolved to trust to his own audacity .
or a story .
as far as i can see , it will be your chief diversion hereafter ;
and heathcliff gradually lost his frown and began to look quite pleasant , when all at once our conversation was interrupted by a rumbling sound moving up the road and entering the court .
no amusement usurped a minute :
and i did not wish to “ frighten ” her husband , as she said , and multiply his annoyances for the purpose of serving her selfishness .
and besides , edgar has not been kind , has he ?
in that manner hareton , who should now be the first gentleman in the neighbourhood , was reduced to a state of complete dependence on his father’s inveterate enemy ;
it’s only a cold that ails him , the same as papa has .
her thick , long hair had been partly removed at the beginning of her illness , and now she wore it simply combed in its natural tresses over her temples and neck .
don’t stand muttering and mumbling there .
unluckily , my confidence proved misplaced .
i shall not bear it !
cathy’s dance stopped also .
and they sat like automatons , one on each side of the fire , the elder happily too deaf to understand her wicked nonsense , as he would have called it , the younger doing his best to seem to disregard it .
the primroses and crocuses were hidden under wintry drifts ;
he passed on , entered his chamber , and shut the door .
honest people don’t hide their deeds .
“ from selfish motives partly :
yet there was something in the manner of pronouncing my name which made it sound familiar .
he had been content with daily labour and rough animal enjoyments , till catherine crossed his path .
” he growled , with uncompromising gruffness .
he’ll break his heart should anything happen !
or else to persuade mr heathcliff to give me a guide .
“ yes , ” answered mrs dean , “ as soon as they are married , and that will be on new year’s day .
his gun burst while out on the hills by himself ;
it’s maister hathecliff’s ye’re wanting ?
“ i cannot read it .
“ and why didn’t mamma speak to me about him ?
next morning bright and cheerful out of doors stole softened in through the blinds of the silent room , and suffused the couch and its occupant with a mellow , tender glow .
” i inquired .
if god afflict your enemies , surely that ought to suffice you .
you smile ;
“ aha !
and you are not angry with me :
“ you hate me as much as mr heathcliff does , and more .
he did not quit the house again that afternoon , and no one intruded on his solitude ;
and certainly you shall not go to gimmerton to-night , so it is needless to order the carriage .
and you want me :
i should like to be climbing up there !
“ my name was isabella linton , ” i replied .
nothing could excuse it , unless you were having your throat cut !
“ to the devil with your clamour !
she lifted the letter , and seemed to peruse it ;
we were ranged in a row , on a sack of corn , groaning and shivering , and hoping that joseph would shiver too , so that he might give us a short homily for his own sake .
there was a labourer working at a fence round a plantation , on the borders of the grounds .
the moors , where you ramble with him , are much nicer ;
i was comfortably revelling in the spring fragrance around , and the beautiful soft blue overhead , when my young lady , who had run down near the gate to procure some primrose roots for a border , returned only half laden , and informed us that mr heathcliff was coming in .
and i some way fancy no one could see catherine linton and not love her .
“ i will not hear you speak so to him .
i daresay she had been on the watch for me since morning :
” he replied in a subdued voice .
he answered , “ no , i’ll defer it this year a little longer .
it must have been temporary derangement ;
my eye wandered from manuscript to print .
“ wait till he wakes , and be patient .
he’s asleep , and papa will be wanting us back .
open your mouth .
his dark face rather sallower and more composed , his frame a stone or two heavier , perhaps , and no other difference .
she could not bear the notion which i had put into her head of mr linton’s philosophical resignation .
the invalid complained of being covered with ashes ;
“ proud people breed sad sorrows for themselves .
and if ever i come into his hands again he is welcome to a signal revenge .
but mr heathcliff forms a singular contrast to his abode and style of living .
yes :
catherine quelled her lamentations also , took a seat opposite , and looked solemnly into the fire .
he had his private manner of interpreting the phrase , and it seemed necessary the brother should sin different sins on every occasion .
one end , indeed , reflected splendidly both light and heat from ranks of immense pewter dishes , interspersed with silver jugs and tankards , towering row after row , on a vast oak dresser , to the very roof .
the former , when he had deposited his burden , took a critical survey of the room , and in cracked tones grated out “ aw wonder how yah can faishion to stand thear i’ idleness un war , when all on ’ems goan out !
which she obeyed , abruptly , on discovering the reason of his intimation .
” he inquired , turning to take a last glance into the valley , whence a light mist mounted and formed a fleecy cloud on the skirts of the blue .
at seven o’clock he came , and inquired if miss linton had risen .
and young linton , with all his superiority , found it difficult to make an equally deep impression .
i saw but listen , and you shall hear how i found you out ;
her husband lies in the same spot now ;
miss catherine !
i gazed long at the weather-worn block ;
on my inquiring the subject of his thoughts , he answered gravely “ i’m trying to settle how i shall pay hindley back .
it is a fine evening , and you’ll need no ponies at wuthering heights ;
not having forgotten her recent behaviour .
snapping at and teasing catherine continually , at the imminent risk of exhausting her limited patience .
“ that’s wrong !
the first appearance of mirth he had exhibited .
i set him a stool by the fire , and offered him a quantity of good things :
and you must have got on an island , sure ?
only , he desired me to remember that the money for the whole affair came out of his pocket .
he didn’t cast a glance towards my companions , though they were sufficiently near for linton’s sobs to be audible ;
his features were lost in masses of shaggy hair that hung on his shoulders ;
the hook was soldered into the staple :
we should have thought ourselves in heaven !
reappearing for the purpose of locking the outer gate , as if we lived in an ancient castle .
i’m not going to tell you again .
neither of us wished to mention heathcliff’s absence , as long as we could conceal it ;
a feeling that reached its climax when his lady rose , and stepping across the rug , seized heathcliff’s hands again , and laughed like one beside herself .
” was the doctor’s next question .
“ no , ” was the muttered reply .
“ nelly dean , ” said he , “ i can’t help fancying there’s an extra cause for this .
i used to send her on her travels round the grounds now on foot , and now on a pony ;
but , pulling it out , i sprang to the door and delivered another ;
though hareton has made him a standing jest for six weeks , and i have used more serious measures , and attempted to frighten him out of his idiocy , he gets worse daily ;
why , it’s good enough to be printed !
my master glanced towards the passage , and signed me to fetch the men :
i had gone downstairs at three o’clock to fetch a jug of water ;
so , instead of penning his peculiar personal sufferings and distresses , the themes constantly uppermost in his thoughts , he harped on the cruel obligation of being held asunder from his friend and love ;
i entreated , and finally attempted to force her to retire .
it looked intelligent , and retained no marks of former degradation .
he being allowed to join her there , and i to remain as housekeeper .
“ only nobody else must be kind to him :
“ i’m only half conscious of it now .
“ nothing but what i can bear , ” he replied ;
her love never fierce :
and now , let us hear what you are unhappy about .
it hardly moved my compassion it appalled me :
and then i’ve recollected his confirmed bad habits , and , hopeless of benefiting him , have flinched from re-entering the dismal house , doubting if i could bear to be taken at my word .
i shall soon be competent to make a clear house of it .
nor any glitter of copper saucepans and tin cullenders on the walls .
flaying and scalping would not have wakened him .
” “ let me get off my wet clothes , and i’ll tell you all about it , nelly , ” he replied .
“ but maister hareton nivir ate naught else , when he wer a little ’un ;
is he turning out a bit of a hypocrite , and coming into the country to work mischief under a cloak ?
my love for linton is like the foliage in the woods :
thereat , catherine silently turned her face from us , and , very stealthily , drew out her pocket-handkerchief and applied it to her eyes ;
and it struck me that he plotted another midnight excursion , of which he had rather we had no suspicion .
“ why , sir , she is my late master’s daughter :
“ and the figures ?’ i cried , encouragingly , perceiving that he came to a dead halt .
donned in her scarlet shawl , with a black silk bonnet on her head , and a willow-basket swung to her arm .
“ my work , miss , ” i replied .
therefore , you must not mention it , unless you be careless of seeing your cousin hereafter :
“ and who showed you up into this room ?
especially as i can never think she’ll be happy .
i was compelled to attempt it , because i had succeeded in rousing his rage a pitch above his malignity .
next spring you’ll long again to have me under this roof , and you’ll look back and think you were happy to-day .
so much had circumstances altered their positions , that he would certainly have struck a stranger as a born and bred gentleman ;
i felt disgusted at the little wretch’s composure , since he was no longer in terror for himself .
i took particular notice of him this time ;
my children are dearer to me than she was ;
we found two in a cupboard , among a heap of old toys , tops , and hoops , and battledores and shuttlecocks .
do you mark those two lines between your eyes ;
“ i am afraid now , ” she replied , “ because , if i stay , papa will be miserable :
and he was a model of a jailor :
we are eternally divided ;
if he stirred to touch anything in compliance with my entreaties , if he stretched his hand out to get a piece of bread , his fingers clenched before they reached it , and remained on the table , forgetful of their aim .
when joseph appeared at the door , revealing by his quivering lip and furious eyes that the outrage committed on his precious shrubs was detected .
i closed the door , and rolled a stone to assist the loosened lock in holding it ;
let us say good-bye ;
if so , give directions .
“ and the curate does not teach you to read and write , then ?
finally , she dived into a hollow ;
“ it is a poor conclusion , is it not ?
but he was as obstinate as a mule , and , instead of snatching at her bait , in wet weather he took to smoking with joseph ;
and they have each a simple headstone above , and a plain grey block at their feet , to mark the graves .
“ worse , ” i replied , “ because more sullen with it .
i can’t take the trouble to raise my hand !
you were not speaking the truth , were you ?
and , besides , i urged the cruelty and selfishness of his destroying mrs linton’s tranquillity for his satisfaction .
and he put his fingers to his eyes to remove incipient tears .
another week over and i am so many days nearer health , and spring !
nay , if it made me a king , i’d not be scorned for seeking her good-will any more .
be off , and entertain her as nicely as you can .
“ for god’s sake , hush !
what a shame of your mother , never to waken your filial regard for me !
while she condoled with me on my sorry predicament , and having obeyed his orders , whereby i was somewhat revived , ushered me to bed .
he imagined himself to be as accomplished as linton , i suppose , because he could spell his own name ;
he made ye skift properly !
and yet if i could do it without seeming insane , i’d never see him again !
he had ceased drinking at a point below irrationality , and had neither stirred nor spoken during two or three hours .
she uttered an inarticulate exclamation , and stood fixed .
it maintains a constant wail send it out of my hearing for an hour ;
“ can you tell ?
the two new friends established themselves in the house during his absence ;
“ i recovered spirits sufficient to hear joseph’s eternal lectures without weeping , and to move up and down the house less with the foot of a frightened thief than formerly .
“ come are you coming ?
“ hindley does not often free us from his accursed presence , ” observed the boy .
drink your tea , and take breath , and give over laughing :
and from that i went on to think of his fondness for heathcliff , and his dread lest he should suffer neglect after death had removed him :
“ that’s not the plan .
“ and he knows your papa wouldn’t let us marry now ;
“ your mother , perhaps , thought you would want to be with him if she mentioned him often to you .
i knew that you could not keep up an acquaintance with your cousin without being brought into contact with him ;
we were journeying to hear the famous jabez branderham preach , from the text “ seventy times seven ;
and she prattled to catherine , and kissed her , and ran about with her , and gave her quantities of presents , at the beginning .
now then .
at any rate , she kept her eyes on me in a cool , regardless manner , exceedingly embarrassing and disagreeable .
and i began , half dreaming , to weary myself with imagining some fit parentage for him ;
i had counselled catherine to dine upstairs ;
“ hush , hush !
but , for heaven’s sake !
hold your noise !
“ nonsense , i do that’s sufficient .
” was the answer , uttered so savagely that i started .
she had a wondrous constancy to old attachments :
though she grew wondrous fond of stealing off to corners by herself ;
“ what notion of propriety must you have to remain here , after the language which has been held to you by that blackguard ?
” i reflected to myself , “ we shall have a fit of illness .
“ must not be continued , then , ” i said .
“ but she must mind and not grow wild again here .
he means to offer liberal payment for permission to lodge at the heights ;
i do regret , however , that he so little deserves the trouble :
“ you are one of those things that are ever found when least wanted , and when you are wanted , never !
“ well , is he coming ?
there never was such a dreary , dismal scene as the formerly cheerful house presented !
“ well , we’ll turn our horses’ heads round when we reach him , ” answered my companion ;
“ running after t’ lads , as usuald !
he is fond of reading , and he thinks of leaving soon to get married ;
people familiar with these moors often miss their road on such evenings ;
he sat by the corpse all night , weeping in bitter earnest .
“ no , mr lockwood , ” said nelly , shaking her head .
” persevered the child .
i did detect a figure creeping along the inner fence of the park ;
“ but i can’t walk upstairs now .
he pines for kindness , as well as love ;
“ well , ellen , i’m so afraid of you being angry , ” she said .
the long light hair curled slightly on the temples ;
i’ve dreamt in my life dreams that have stayed with me ever after , and changed my ideas :
and confessed to me her sorrow that she had endeavoured to raise a bad spirit between him and hareton :
his treatment of the latter was enough to make a fiend of a saint .
“ where’s heathcliff ?
“ that must be a good distance up , ” i answered ;
knowing those about her , but having her mind filled with all sorts of strange ideas and illusions .
i marvelled much how he , with a mind to correspond with his person , could fancy my idea of catherine earnshaw .
you say she is often restless , and anxious-looking :
“ will you have some breakfast ?
your presence is a moral poison that would contaminate the most virtuous :
now , i can neither bear to talk , nor anything else .
” said young earnshaw .
“ yes , ” said catherine , stroking his long soft hair , “ if i could only get papa’s consent , i’d spend half my time with you .
he had none of the timid susceptibility that would have given zest to ill-treatment , in heathcliff’s judgment .
” he said .
and i’m certain linton would recover quickly if he had me to look after him .
do you ever dream , hareton ?
i had seen it follow its mistress upstairs when she went to bed ;
but the snow and wind whirled wildly through , even reaching my station , and blowing out the light .
” returned catherine .
as i sat nursing these reflections , the casement behind me was banged on to the floor by a blow from the latter individual , and his black countenance looked blightingly through .
seven days glided away , every one marking its course by the henceforth rapid alteration of edgar linton’s state .
and so he went on scolding to his den beneath , taking the candle with him ;
after turning over as many as i thought proper , i tied them in a handkerchief and set them aside , relocking the vacant drawer .
and i can see no remedy , at present , unless she could marry again ;
“ i want you to tell me my way , not to show it :
“ your dinner is here , ” i returned ;
i wish to have this place to myself .
and flattered myself we should get on in tolerable comfort .
and that when you sneered at and despised me , and go on plaguing me , and i’ll step in yonder , and say you worried me out of the kitchen !
the fear that she would restrains me .
his lips devoid of their ferocious sneer , and sealed in an expression of unspeakable sadness .
then a new idea flashed across me .
we entered together ;
you may choose what you like :
” “ here , then , ” he said , opening it , and pulling her out .
nearly as young and innocent .
and now that we’ve done washing , and combing , and sulking tell me whether you don’t think yourself rather handsome ?
he is quieter now than he used to be , if no one provokes him :
comprehending precious little of the fluent succession of remarks and questions which her tongue never ceased pouring forth .
i engaged to carry a letter from him to my mistress ;
except the preparing for the burial , and the presence of the mourners .
i wish he’d been soldered in lead .
and besides , you know , i had been his foster-sister , and excused his behaviour more readily than a stranger would .
we had not .
heathcliff , who had raised his eyes at the former speech , gave a sneering laugh at the latter ;
if you had it you’d know what it was ;
i threw a shawl over my head and ran to prevent them from waking mr earnshaw by knocking .
“ who is his master ?
possibly she took that exception for herself .
“ no , ” answered catherine .
and i shook the handle of his den that i might ascertain if he were yet living .
it will not suit me to permit any one the range of the place while i am off guard !
he glanced over the back of the bench , dilating his nostrils , and thought as little of exchanging civilities with me as with my companion the cat .
i wish you had sincerity enough to tell me whether catherine would suffer greatly from his loss :
heathcliff had opened the trinket and cast out its contents , replacing them by a black lock of his own .
in reality as surprised as she was , and anxious to ascertain the truth of her statement ;
it’s like a colt’s mane over his eyes !
and people who do their duty are always finally rewarded .
but , shrinking back , linton clung to his cousin , and implored her to accompany him , with a frantic importunity that admitted no denial .
dice , brandy , cloised shutters , und can’le-light till next day at noon :
no parson in the world ever pictured heaven so beautifully as they did , in their innocent talk ;
my child hiring their children to till their fathers’ lands for wages .
“ hareton , it’s nelly !
don’t be frightened .
i did not mind their skirmishes :
he’s mistaken , i think ;
her cousin was very ill .
he did not omit to avail himself of the opportunity , cautiously and briefly ;
yah may bend to th’ yoak an ye will i noan used to ’t , and an old man doesn’t sooin get used to new barthens .
a positive labour of hercules , i assure you !
but i jerked it forcibly away .
“ i thought you did not know me , or you wouldn’t have spoken in that way .
she told me that her anguish had at last spurred linton to incur the risk of liberating her .
edgar linton , after an inquisitive stare , collected sufficient wit to recognise her .
” i hallooed , responsively .
” muttered heathcliff .
but , excepting a dirty dot pointing up here and there , all traces of their existence had vanished :
and i’ll have his gold too ;
“ what have i done ?
“ couldn’t ye ha’ said soa , at onst ?
” i repeated impatiently .
i want to cheat my uncomfortable conscience , and be convinced that heathcliff has no notion of these things .
yes ;
“ i’m tired , ” he interrupted , hurriedly .
but there was a grace in his manner that mitigated these defects , and rendered him not unpleasing .
“ he turns you adrift on the world with surprising alacrity .
“ why , man , ” i exclaimed , facing him angrily , “ this is not a place to sleep in .
he followed my example , and left the room ;
linton denied that people ever hated their wives ;
“ if there be any , they are out of my way :
“ nay , ” he replied , looking down , and blushing bashfully .
” i said at length .
from that period , for several months , she ceased to hold any communication with me , save in the relation of a mere servant .
“ i can’t do with that , ” he said ;
and edgar standing solemnly by to see it over ;
you are attempting the coxcomb , are you ?
so i chattered on ;
his had first-rate qualities , and they are lost :
“ i tell you i won’t hearken to your dreams , miss catherine !
no !
we quarrelled at one time of our lives , with unchristian ferocity ;
whether she would have got over this fancy if left to herself , or persevered in nursing it perpetually , i cannot say :
for i knew heathcliff’s accents , and feared he might search further , if i kept quiet .
your health , sir ?
oh , lord , judge ’em , for there’s norther law nor justice among wer rullers !
” he said ;
it is from mr heathcliff .
mr earnshaw invited him !
with a sweep of his hand he cleared a vacant space in front among the breakfast things , and leant forward to gaze more at his ease .
she said he had only been twice , on horseback , accompanying his father ;
i should only pity him hate him , perhaps , if he were ugly , and a clown .
“ i’m dreadfully grieved at you , miss cathy :
i gave due inward applause to every object , and then i remembered how old earnshaw used to come in when all was tidied , and call me a cant lass , and slip a shilling into my hand as a christmas-box ;
and the senseless incapability of discerning that i was in earnest when i gave her my opinion of her infatuation and herself .
” said heathcliff .
the old cynic chose to be vastly offended at this nicety ;
“ oh , i forgot you ,’ said the tyrant .
ah !
i did not fear her breaking bounds ;
but i won’t complain to you !
thereat began a feeble scratching outside , and the pile of books moved as if thrust forward .
i sent for kenneth , and he came ;
reluctant as he was to leave home at ordinary calls , he flew to answer this ;
she never had power to conceal her passion , it always set her whole complexion in a blaze .
he said i might come to his house when i pleased ;
“ not that i was ignorant of your miserable , degraded character , but i felt you were only partly responsible for that ;
i conjecture , they died of the same thing , a kind of fever , slow at its commencement , but incurable , and rapidly consuming life towards the close .
he never struck me as such a marvellous treasure .
but you can’t speak to me !
“ come , come !
his peevish reproofs wakened in her a naughty delight to provoke him :
i did not call her unfeeling long ;
“ he’s safe , and i’m free ,’ she answered :
i have a sympathetic chord within that tells me it is nothing of the sort :
yet i feel as if i could enjoy something interesting .
“ and if you are his choice , he’ll be the most unfortunate creature that ever was born !
his thick brown curls were rough and uncultivated , his whiskers encroached bearishly over his cheeks , and his hands were embrowned like those of a common labourer :
hush , child , hush !
two benches , shaped in sections of a circle , nearly enclosed the hearth ;
don’t say anything ;
for hareton earnshaw was performing his orison sotto voce , in a series of curses directed against every object he touched , while he rummaged a corner for a spade or shovel to dig through the drifts .
“ the curate ?
these were erected and daubed with lime on purpose to serve as guides in the dark , and also when a fall , like the present , confounded the deep swamps on either hand with the firmer path :
“ what do you mean ?
“ the fool stared , with a grin hovering about his lips , and a scowl gathering over his eyes , as if uncertain whether he might not join in my mirth :
summer drew to an end , and early autumn :
a centipede from the indies , for instance , which curiosity leads one to examine in spite of the aversion it raises .
affirming , if the truth were known , hareton would be found little else than a beggar .
i could not bear the employment .
it wur hard to gie up my awn hearthstun , but i thowt i could do that !
“ there , that is pure awkwardness !
i’m past wanting you .
“ oh , i’ll ask you , uncle , ” cried miss cathy , recollecting the housekeeper’s assertion .
commenting on his stupidity and idleness ;
i said mrs heathcliff lived above a dozen years after quitting her husband .
i’s gang up to my own rahm .
partly arising from his knowledge of the good causes i have to feel that sentiment for him , and partly from original aversion .
” and she leant her pretty head back against the sill , with half a yawn and half a sigh , and lapsed into an aspect of abstracted sadness :
“ oh !
ah , i thought myself , she might recover , so waited on as she was .
he made no ceremony of knocking or announcing his name :
where he doubted not she was gone .
and i think your master himself would scarcely object to her visiting her cousin .
he seized the poker , smashed the lock from the inner door , and made his escape as they tramped in .
and there i was , sitting with the moaning doll of a child laid on my knee ;
he then stepped across the pavement to her , and said something :
i seemed to keep them closed above a quarter of an hour ;
it’s bonny behaviour , lurking amang t’ fields , after twelve o’ t’ night , wi’ that fahl , flaysome divil of a gipsy , heathcliff !
what possessed him to turn listener ?
i approached , and , attempting to take his chubby fist , said “ how do you do , my dear ?
a movement of catherine’s relieved me a little presently :
“ pray ride on !
tell me , sincerely , what you think of him :
her cheeks flushed , and the tears gushed over them .
perceiving me immovable , she essayed another method of showing her disrelish for her occupation .
“ joseph uttered his croaking laugh again .
“ yes , ” i observed , “ about as starved and sackless as you :
affirming that i loved the villain yet ;
at a notice that i could do with her no longer intercepting my light , she removed to the hearthstone .
he trembles , as if i were really going to touch him !
i did wish mr heathcliff would remove here , and then we might have been together again .
“ how could you lie so glaringly as to affirm i hated the poor child’ ?
i see a repose that neither earth nor hell can break , and i feel an assurance of the endless and shadowless hereafter the eternity they have entered where life is boundless in its duration , and love in its sympathy , and joy in its fulness .
the master listened , and he just smiled to himself , and said , if they have been in the marsh , they are out now , zillah .
i snuffed it off , and , very ill at ease under the influence of cold and lingering nausea , sat up and spread open the injured tome on my knee .
i looked surprised .
then the language he had held to her rankled in her heart ;
she paused , and resumed with a strange smile .
i obeyed her summons , and accompanied her out .
and as to hareton , the curate should take him in hand , by-and-by .
so be good enough to sit and chat an hour .
” said i .
however , she’ll suit this house so much the better for not being over nice , and i’ll take care she does not disgrace me by rambling abroad .
assuring me , repeatedly , that “ the barn was every bit as good ” as i , “ and every bit as wollsome , ” and wondering how i could fashion to be so conceited .
“ you want a candle to take upstairs :
it was enough to try the temper of a saint , such senseless , wicked rages !
how did ?
” tittered linton .
thinking it would enable them to judge , in some measure , what grounds they had for hoping to succeed in separating the two friends .
how has the idea entered your head ?
terror made me cruel ;
thanks to his fearless nature , which offered no temptation to that course of oppression :
i detested him just then .
heathcliff had knelt on one knee to embrace her ;
as you hate them both , you’d not miss them :
“ sit still , mrs dean , ” i cried ;
and a thing that amazed us , and set the neighbours gossiping right and left he brought a wife with him .
he bid me be silent ;
you are not afraid of me ?
hareton allowed zillah to give him her aid ;
poor linton ran a frightened eye over the faces of the three .
we buried him , to the scandal of the whole neighbourhood , as he wished .
and mr linton hastened his step at the noise .
you’ll judge , as well as i can , all these things :
“ don’t torture me till i’m as mad as yourself , ” cried he , wrenching his head free , and grinding his teeth .
i should mention that isabella sent to her brother , some six weeks from her departure , a short note , announcing her marriage with heathcliff .
“ how long ago ?
” i cried , uncertain whether to regard him as a worldly visitor , and i raised my hands in amazement .
not the animation of high spirits though , nor yet of joy ;
i saw nothing ;
i believe linton had laid it there :
the earlier dated were embarrassed and short ;
then she whispered me to watch whether he touched it , and departed .
my bodily eye was cheated into a momentary belief that the child lifted its face and stared straight into mine !
though provided with a large library , i’m frequently very dull at the grange ;
she made no stay at the stairs’-head , but mounted farther , to the garret where heathcliff was confined , and called him .
“ i wish you would say catherine , or cathy , ” interrupted my young lady .
she pledged her word , and kept it for my sake .
no angel in heaven could be more beautiful than she appeared .
and i’m going to bed .
this pleased him , for he was not much better :
there was no sound through the house but the moaning wind , which shook the windows every now and then , the faint crackling of the coals , and the click of my snuffers as i removed at intervals the long wick of the candle .
i heard you ;
won’t you come here again ?
“ and should i always be sitting with you ?
“ take care you do no such thing , mrs dean !
and , ignoble as it seems to insult a fallen enemy , i couldn’t miss this chance of sticking in a dart :
you are making a jest of it :
” she said , interrupting me .
she ought to have her own way ;
shut the knife , and returned it to its concealment .
where , doubtless , he administered a rough remedy to cool the fit of passion , for he appeared red and breathless .
” i interrupted .
i thought he intended to cut a caper round the bed ;
” and they both set up a heart-breaking cry .
“ or is he simple :
and being too busy , and too old then , to run up and down amusing her , i hit on a method by which she might entertain herself .
for another , in following the house , i was forced to quit her frequently , and she complained of loneliness :
a maniac’s fury kindled under her brows ;
and asked him to show her the way :
that was my first idea on observing an elf-locked , brown-eyed boy setting his ruddy countenance against the bars .
he was my late master :
and she did turn out a haughty , headstrong creature !
“ you are not going yet .
i never say to him , let this or that enemy alone , because it would be ungenerous or cruel to harm them ;’ i say , let them alone , because i should hate them to be wronged :’ and he’d crush you like a sparrow’s egg , isabella , if he found you a troublesome charge .
afterwards , she refused to eat , and now she alternately raves and remains in a half dream ;
there was scarcely time to experience a thrill of horror before we saw that the little wretch was safe .
for to see the master looking glad would not be an every-day spectacle .
“ stay all night ?
heathcliff had returned from his watch earlier than usual ;
“ people can have many cousins and of all sorts , miss cathy , without being any the worse for it ;
earnshaw surlily bid her remove her things to the kitchen .
no law in england can hinder a man from keeping his house decent , and mine’s abominable !
he’s a pretty little darling when he’s good .
” i began to cry , “ you villain !
i did not care hardly what they did to each other ;
will you ” (looking at me) “ step into the kitchen and see ?
and then i dare not come again .
her present countenance had a wild vindictiveness in its white cheek , and a bloodless lip and scintillating eye ;
that was over hours since .
it’s so cold !
then she accompanied him into the grounds , and the whole day passed as usual :
“ do you understand what the word pity means ?
“ what use is it praising heathcliff to him ?
you’ve done just right to tell the story leisurely .
my question remained so long unanswered , that i thought the old man had grown deaf , and repeated it louder .
“ but it is frenzy to repeat these thoughts to you :
he said mr green , the lawyer , was out when he arrived at his house , and he had to wait two hours for his re-entrance ;
but his dread of that owner amounted to superstition ;
her husband took his stand on the hearthstone , near me , and began to put questions concerning catherine .
she didn’t thank him ;
they tell that in the village about your being lost in the marsh ;
” she inquired , gazing earnestly at the mirror .
consequently , he rose , in suicidal low spirits , as fit for the church as for a dance ;
joseph was fain , i believe , of the lad’s removal ;
“ don’t leave me !
at least , i would not keep my doors barred in the day-time .
he was worked up to forget the fiendish prudence he boasted of , and proceeded to murderous violence .
she did not know my share in contributing to the disturbance , and i was anxious to keep her in ignorance .
meantime , thank you for telling me your sister-in-law’s secret :
he encouraged him to regard hindley as a reprobate ;
we laughed outright at the petted things ;
his eyes pursued it with unwearied diligence , and , even in speaking to me , were never weaned away .
i spared a minute to open the gate for it , but instead of going to the house door , it coursed up and down snuffing the grass , and would have escaped to the road , had i not seized it and conveyed it in with me .
you had made him ashamed of his ignorance before , i have no doubt ;
a little for hindley :
but go make haste !
the gardeners and coachman were there :
and he called on mr earnshaw !
neither am i aware of the means he took to raise his mind from the savage ignorance into which it was sunk :
we saw him walking to and fro in the garden while we concluded our meal , and earnshaw said he’d go and ask why he would not dine :
he threw up his office of magistrate , ceased even to attend church , avoided the village on all occasions , and spent a life of entire seclusion within the limits of his park and grounds ;
“ i didn’t tell a tale .
he walked up and down , with his hands in his pockets , apparently quite forgetting my presence ;
you are not so bewitched , ma’am , are you , as to remain with him of your own accord ?
she never moved .
and you both come to bewail the deed to me , as if you were the people to be pitied !
“ consent to what ?
mrs dean raised the candle , and i discerned a soft-featured face , exceedingly resembling the young lady at the heights , but more pensive and amiable in expression .
at last , hareton uttered a smothered laugh .
when i saw her face again it is hers yet !
cathy , catching a glimpse of her friend in his concealment , flew to embrace him ;
“ you are leagued with the rest , ellen !
” asked mrs linton .
i can’t tell what to do to make you talk to me ;
“ think for yourself !
mr hareton , i wonder you should have no more wit than to go and make that mess at her bidding !
not taking leisure to consider why she was so flurried , or how her talk would have affected him .
who fought valorously to defend his trust , and we spilt the milk between us ;
linton giggled :
he’s my uncle , remember ;
“ don’t put faith in a single word he speaks .
“ i cannot rest , ellen , ” she said , by way of apology .
but edgar did not mean to entertain him with any high flights of passion .
she soon heard me :
” demanded the old man , looking round for heathcliff .
though , if i had not learned he was out of the way , i’d have halted at the kitchen , washed my face , warmed myself , got you to bring what i wanted , and departed again to anywhere out of the reach of my accursed of that incarnate goblin !
if the dead villain could rise from his grave to abuse me for his offspring’s wrongs , i should have the fun of seeing the said offspring fight him back again , indignant that he should dare to rail at the one friend he has in the world !
yah mun’n’t drive him out of his heead for nowt !
“ what !
” he replied .
commending catherine to my peculiar vigilance , in his absence , with reiterated orders that she must not wander out of the park , even under my escort :
but the hour came , at last , that ended mr earnshaw’s troubles on earth .
“ what kept her up ?
the servant was clearing and wiping down the table .
and then she seized linton’s reluctant fingers and crushed them into his .
but why do you look so lively and interested when i talk about her ?
what a beauty !
i’m not going to nurture her in luxury and idleness after linton is gone .
“ away , away with it !
he played with heathcliff’s whiskers , and stroked his cheek ;
and zillah (that is their housekeeper) made us a clean room and a good fire , and told us that , as joseph was out at a prayer-meeting and hareton earnshaw was off with his dogs robbing our woods of pheasants , as i heard afterwards we might do what we liked .
you’re wandering .
heathcliff , on the second thoughts , resolved to avoid a struggle against three underlings :
you hold your tongue !
i must confess , that if i had been in the young lady’s place , i would , at least , have swept the hearth , and wiped the tables with a duster .
cathy carried a footstool and her cup to his side .
but you may sing a song , if you can sing ;
“ no ;
fellow-martyrs , have at him !
you were mighty eager to set off , but your longing to see poor linton has soon evaporated !
i’ll own that he’s with a harsh set .
“ have you no fear of the consequences , mrs linton ?
it shall not exist !
i never want to hear , or read , or think of them again !
he had the cunning to unlock and re-lock the door , without shutting it ;
and was in amazement on seeing the minute-hand measure half-past one .
for the porter’s lodge is untenanted as yet .
coming down somewhat later than usual , i saw , by the sunbeams piercing the chinks of the shutters , miss catherine still seated near the fireplace .
how must i quit her ?
she teased mr linton about it ;
for shame !
joseph mumbled indistinctly in the depths of the cellar , but gave no intimation of ascending ;
mr linton had resumed his seat by the bed ;
“ i’ll be very kind to him , you needn’t fear , ” he said , laughing .
she had failed to recover her equanimity since the little dispute with heathcliff .
“ what is ther to do , now ?
” he said .
i rose , and went into the garden , as soon as i could see , to ascertain if there were any footmarks under his window .
and a foolish notion struck me that his heart was quelled and he prayed , because his lips moved and his gaze was bent on the ground .
i determined to take a peep at her mysterious treasures ;
“ i feared i should have to come down and fetch my property myself .
but he clung to me with growing trepidation ;
i shook my head .
and , for the space of half a year , the gunpowder lay as harmless as sand , because no fire came near to explode it .
“ i did not question him , ” i answered .
had i seen it nearer august , i’m sure it would have tempted me to waste a month among its solitudes .
i on the brink of the grave !
“ on what occasion ?
she selected one of her own favourites , and got forward steadily about an hour ;
“ joseph is loading lime on the further side of penistone crags ;
and why have you asked me to hang her picture over your fireplace ?
the pettishness that might be caressed into fondness , had yielded to a listless apathy ;
” she returned .
“ and the mistress ?
an austere silence prevailing while we discussed our meal .
certainly she had ways with her such as i never saw a child take up before ;
i also threw little light on his inquiries , for i hardly knew what to hide and what to reveal .
“ he’s doing his very utmost ;
you have got them , ” she commenced immediately , dropping on her knees , when we were enclosed alone .
oh , no !
it suited catherine to have him there :
i could not overpass them !
and not exactly of the kind which i should have chosen to amuse me .
i can recollect its chief incidents , as far as she had gone .
dear uncle !
it is some devil that urges me to thwart my own schemes by killing him .
zillah and i ascended after him ;
“ but he’s not angry :
“ mr hareton is desirous of increasing his amount of knowledge , ” i said , coming to his rescue .
i wanted all to sparkle and dance in a glorious jubilee .
and afterwards she furnished me with the sequel of heathcliff’s history .
we both reached home before our dinner-time ;
be quiet !
and that minx , catherine linton , or earnshaw , or however she was called she must have been a changeling wicked little soul !
we heard him mount the stairs directly ;
you needn’t fear .
a quick glance now and then sufficed ;
i was frightened , and mrs earnshaw was ready to fling it out of doors :
and with it you wouldn’t , unless he possessed the four former attractions .
i don’t care i will get in !
the light flashed on his features as i spoke .
but i divined instinctively that catherine’s heart was clouded now in double darkness .
those books , both prose and verse , are consecrated to me by other associations ;
on my re-entrance , i found mr heathcliff below .
“ with all my heart !
careful and kind that’s paternal .
catherine frowned , and retreated to the window-seat chewing her lip , and endeavouring , by humming an eccentric tune , to conceal a growing tendency to sob .
“ or else an idle whim is going to spirit me away .
” he murmured ;
catherine shall linger no longer to argue with the low ruffian i have humoured her enough .
what prey , robert ?’ hallooed linton from the entrance .
” i cried , perceiving the master to be tolerably sober .
hareton responded , and presently the two re-entered .
i despatched emissaries down this path , and that path , and at last went wandering in search of her myself .
had it been another , i would have covered my face in the presence of such grief .
it was too irksome to lie there , harassing my brain with a hundred idle misgivings .
” he echoed , sneeringly , “ parlour !
and she would have commenced the execution of her threat directly , but linton was up in alarm for his dear self again .
she was too glad of her escape to resist ;
a just punishment for her mortal transgressions , i’ve no doubt !
i shall be your father , to-morrow all the father you’ll have in a few days and you shall have plenty of that .
may we not go a little way half a mile , ellen , only just half a mile ?
day and night he was watching , and patiently enduring all the annoyances that irritable nerves and a shaken reason could inflict ;
and spoken as one would speak to a person present ;
” i exclaimed , astonished .
she took her post before the urn ;
” i exclaimed .
a lusty dame , with tucked-up gown , bare arms , and fire-flushed cheeks , rushed into the midst of us flourishing a frying-pan :
how ill you do look !
but i didn’t mind him , i was straining to see the bairn , ” and she began again to describe it rapturously .
if we had been mad enough to order that proceeding , we had not time .
though it’s as dark almost as if it came from the devil .
as i hesitated whether to go off at once , or return and seek my mistress , a slight cough drew my attention to the hearth .
the poor thing was finally got off , with several delusive assurances that his absence should be short :
she never opened her mouth .
i’ve fought through a bitter life since i last heard your voice ;
he wanted spirit in general .
i heard only a week ago it was joseph who told me i met him at gimmerton :
he had only then come from the library ;
i’d inform if he were my own son :
” he cried , with frightful vehemence , stamping his foot , and groaning in a sudden paroxysm of ungovernable passion .
and spreading my umbrella , i drew my charge underneath :
sit down , and allow me to shut the door .
a monster , and not a human being !
“ send ellen , then , to let papa know i’m safe !
ancient associations lingered round my heart ;
they see us at church , you know , though we seldom meet them elsewhere .
i’ve been exceedingly naughty , but i won’t do it any more !
” i exclaimed , involuntarily .
and her face it was lucky he could not see her face , or he would never have been so steady .
but the uproar passed away in twenty minutes , leaving us all unharmed ;
precipitating myself , in fact , towards the beacon-light of the grange .
“ a rough fellow , rather , mrs dean .
could it be hurtful to send for some one some minister of any denomination , it does not matter which to explain it , and show you how very far you have erred from its precepts ;
and there might as well be the atlantic to part us , instead of those four miles :
and that appearance causes me pain , amounting to agony .
i hope you are satisfied , miss cathy , that you are not the person to benefit him ;
” asked the mistress , in a tone particularly calculated to provoke her husband , implying both carelessness and contempt of his irritation .
let me alone , and i’ll plan it out :
but the country folks , if you ask them , would swear on the bible that he walks :
and they have all turned to enemies in a few hours .
i shrieked out that frightens her she heard papa coming , and she broke the hinges and divided the case , and gave me her mother’s portrait ;
whether she be a native of the country , or , as is more probable , an exotic that the surly indigenae will not recognise for kin .
then she stole away , and quietly seated herself beside her cousin .
and the once brilliant pewter-dishes , which used to attract my gaze when i was a girl , partook of a similar obscurity , created by tarnish and dust .
however , mr earnshaw soon convinced him that he was alive still ;
and , truly , it appeared as if the lad were possessed of something diabolical at that period .
for , though he was twenty-three and she eighteen , each had so much of novelty to feel and learn , that neither experienced nor evinced the sentiments of sober disenchanted maturity .
“ she’s fainted , or dead , ” i thought :
i think i should not be peevish with you :
“ i thought i was lying in my chamber at wuthering heights .
“ and i want my children about me , to be sure .
“ and because he is young and cheerful .
her appearance was altered , as i had told heathcliff ;
one gone on an errand , and the other at his work , probably .
acquisitions that flattered her from the first for she was full of ambition and led her to adopt a double character without exactly intending to deceive any one .
the spiteful thing wouldn’t let me :
i went and called , but got no answer .
kind , sweet , good catherine !
what !
i , like a fool , didn’t recollect that , till i heard her laughing and exclaiming “ ellen !
but neither cathy , nor the pony , nor the two pointers were visible in any direction :
but you are so dirty !
even heathcliff kept his hold on her affections unalterably ;
” at that crisis , a sudden inspiration descended on me ;
she showed herself , as she often was in life , a devil to me !
i’ve had many a laugh at her perplexities and untold troubles , which she vainly strove to hide from my mockery .
oh , i’m burning !
they will live in the kitchen , and the rest will be shut up .
he delighted to witness hindley degrading himself past redemption ;
she also got a trick of coming down early in the morning and lingering about the kitchen , as if she were expecting the arrival of something ;
a predicament which only those who have experienced it can appreciate .
isabella i believe she is eleven , a year younger than cathy lay screaming at the farther end of the room , shrieking as if witches were running red-hot needles into her .
his countenance was much older in expression and decision of feature than mr linton’s ;
ere long i perceived a group of the servants passing up the road towards the kitchen wing .
in vapid listlessness i leant my head against the window , and continued spelling over catherine earnshaw heathcliff linton , till my eyes closed ;
and i’ve sometimes relented , from pure lack of invention , in my experiments on what she could endure , and still creep shamefully cringing back !
as to your money , she does not even know that you will have any .
“ i can’t tell why we should stay .
i experienced pleasure in being able to exasperate him :
it is far from being the case :
and , after he had told joseph what was to be done during the day , he turned to hindley , and cathy , and me for i sat eating my porridge with them and he said , speaking to his son , “ now , my bonny man , i’m going to liverpool to-day , what shall i bring you ?
“ winter is not here yet .
“ th’ divil’s harried off his soul , ” he cried , “ and he may hev’ his carcass into t’ bargin , for aught i care !
he wept wildly , kissing her supporting hands , and yet could not summon courage to speak out .
don’t persist , sir !
and i are going to rebel we took our initiatory step this evening .
“ it’s not high enough .
he shrugged his shoulders :
“ i didn’t mean to take them ;
but really with it , and in it .
“ and i would have been there too , but they had not the manners to ask me to stay .
i care nothing for your sufferings .
we have no secrets between us .
” he said , opening his great-coat , which he held bundled up in his arms .
“ i was only going to say that heaven did not seem to be my home ;
” i asked .
the poor thing discovered her loss directly she screamed out “ oh , he’s dead , heathcliff !
and catherine , probably , from her thoughts .
it was a fever ;
but when she was calm , there seemed unearthly beauty in the change .
each has a bludgeon ;
what right answer me for the poor fancy you felt for linton ?
and i cannot bide it .
” she wrote .
will that please you , dear ?
“ have you no place you call a parlour ?
“ i don’t want it now , ” he muttered , hastily :
catherine reappeared , bearing a tray of knives and forks .
he had grown sparer , and lost his colour , and spoke and dressed quite differently ;
and his manner was even dignified :
therefore , don’t expect him to play and run about with you directly .
“ where are you going ?
a wild , wicked slip she was but she had the bonniest eye , the sweetest smile , and lightest foot in the parish :
“ not he !
what he meant to do i cannot tell ;
“ good !
” i continued , disregarding the woman’s interference .
i determined to watch his movements .
i shall leave you , unless you be quick ;
i shed tears , master heathcliff , you see an elderly woman , and a servant merely and you , after pretending such affection , and having reason to worship her almost , store every tear you have for yourself , and lie there quite at ease .
“ gooid lord !
we really must go back .
it’s unutterably too much for flesh and blood to bear even mine .
our hurry prevented any comment on the encounter with heathcliff , as we stretched towards home ;
and i don’t desire to think ;
heathcliff’s come back he is !
she tried to put it more comfortably .
a person who has not done one-half his day’s work by ten o’clock , runs a chance of leaving the other half undone .
we won’t let her .
“ he is not envious , but emulous of your attainments .
she fretted and sighed , and looked at her watch till eight , and finally went to her room , completely overdone with sleep ;
“ we neither of us have the privilege of owning your good fairy ;
it was growing dark we heard a sound of voices at the garden-gate .
what is he about ?
oh , i owe him so much .
and , walking to the window , looked out towards gimmerton kirk .
“ nor-ne me !
“ you’ll never be content till you’re sent about your business .
she never took an aversion to me , though .
and we didn’t settle it till all was nearly cold .
she waxed lachrymose .
she was about to dart off again ;
at last his cries were choked by a dreadful fit of coughing ;
it stood looking through the gate .
nay , it’s not nelly ;
she persevered , and finally persuaded him to hold communion with her through the boards .
“ nay , ” he answered ;
and i asked linton to call zillah in to help us , and we’d have a game at blindman’s-buff ;
and then those you term weak are very capable of being as obstinate as you .
“ most likely , heathcliff noticed more the truth of what was said , than the spirit of the person who said it .
and then she poured out further frantic entreaties that i would burn them do anything rather than show them .
and those i know one from another :
and , lifting up his eyes , howled , not like a man , but like a savage beast being goaded to death with knives and spears .
she returned to the hearth , and frankly extended her hand .
god !
she was conscious of his aim , and in her better moods endured his efforts placidly , only showing their uselessness by now and then suppressing a wearied sigh , and checking him at last with the saddest of smiles and kisses .
therefore catherine was thrown on her own resources for amusement .
i expostulated , and desired that he should have his in a mug ;
thank god !
“ it’s a pity he cannot kill himself with drink , ” observed heathcliff , muttering an echo of curses back when the door was shut .
“ she had a right to go if she pleased .
i’m not angry that you struck me .
to quarrel who should hold a heap of warm hair , and each begin to cry because both , after struggling to get it , refused to take it .
he is clearly on the verge of madness :
“ if you don’t let me in , i’ll kill you !
“ you needn’t have touched me !
at other times , she would turn petulantly away , and hide her face in her hands , or even push him off angrily ;
girt idle seeght !
i’ve often groaned aloud , till that old rascal joseph no doubt believed that my conscience was playing the fiend inside of me .
” i exclaimed ;
yah sud ha’ send word .
” he inquired .
besides , it’s infernal affectation devilish conceit it is , to cherish our ears we’re asses enough without them .
thus interrupting herself , the housekeeper rose , and proceeded to lay aside her sewing ;
“ and who will live here then ?
another evening came .
one may guess the power of the north wind , blowing over the edge , by the excessive slant of a few stunted firs at the end of the house ;
and both fell locked together on the hearth .
“ and i must suffer for her egotism !
is that it ?
“ ah , ” said she , “ you are come a-seeking your little mistress !
i no longer felt inclined to call heathcliff a capital fellow .
cathy , beside herself , gave the chair a violent push , and caused him to fall against one arm .
“ mr hareton recoiled , looking as foolish as he could do :
and i defy you to hurt him when i am by , and i defy you to frighten me !
and she must tell her mr kenneth says she must be quiet .
there was no reply to my question ;
if you would hear me without being angry , i might offer some advice that would make you happier .
on a mellow evening in september , i was coming from the garden with a heavy basket of apples which i had been gathering .
and she was soon strong enough to move from one to the other , leaning on edgar’s arm .
you want whipping for bringing us in here at all , with your dastardly puling tricks :
i have lost the faculty of enjoying their destruction , and i am too idle to destroy for nothing .
i love all his looks , and all his actions , and him entirely and altogether .
she ran to the door immediately , and answered , “ yes .
do , there’s a darling !
i’ve been told i might leave him before ;
do you hear ?
“ she’s upstairs :
after a short period he resumed his meditation on the picture , took it down and leant it against the sofa to contemplate it at better advantage ;
his attention became , by degrees , quite centred in the study of her thick silky curls :
“ half a dozen nephews shall erase her title , please heaven !
when would you catch me wishing to have what catherine wanted ?
i thought he meant for missis’s sickness , so i answered , yes .
you have pledged your word , and cannot retract .
instead of sitting down , i snatched my outdoor things , and hastened below , for the way was free .
earnshaw had his countenance completely averted from his companion .
they were respected with sympathising silence by her husband , who ascribed them to an alteration in her constitution , produced by her perilous illness ;
she’ll be delighted to find me capable of talking cheerfully .
“ she might have been living yet , if it had not been for him !
and i’d be glad of a retaliation that wouldn’t recoil on myself ;
and it was covered with writing scratched on the paint .
“ and he will be rich , and i shall like to be the greatest woman of the neighbourhood , and i shall be proud of having such a husband .
had our teachers scorned instead of aiding us , we should stumble and totter yet .
catherine !
and , at death , i shall not rejoice that i am going to her :
indeed , i shouldn’t have discovered that he had been there , except for the disarrangement of the drapery about the corpse’s face , and for observing on the floor a curl of light hair , fastened with a silver thread ;
i’ve formed my resolution , and by god i’ll execute it !’ cried the desperate being .
but it quickly subsided as he looked at the young man :
her countenance grew sadder and graver , and her clasped hands trembled .
“ i’m seeking a tenant for the grange , ” he answered ;
and she shan’t go home !
the master himself avoided offending him , knowing why he came ;
at present it is as smooth and verdant as its companion mounds and i hope its tenant sleeps as soundly .
she neglected her meals , her studies , and her play ;
though i cannot say i made a gentle nurse , and joseph and the master were no better , and though our patient was as wearisome and headstrong as a patient could be , she weathered it through .
you do not know me ?
and her cousin , after struggling awhile to keep down his softer feelings , pulled out the letter and flung it on the floor beside her , as ungraciously as he could .
and i was presently below with my precious charge pressed to my heart .
“ i shall come to a prettier , yet , nelly , ” laughed the misguided man , recovering his hardness .
but make haste !
“ sit on the settle and let me lean on your knee .
but that’s because i’m used to edgar and isabella linton .
and i won’t come suing for his assistance ;
you know , they both appeared in a measure my children :
he cannot be in bed , i thought :
he might as well plant an oak in a flower-pot , and expect it to thrive , as imagine he can restore her to vigour in the soil of his shallow cares !
“ but i have been vexed , because you wouldn’t come .
catherine had risen with an impulse to dash out , when she saw him .
he roamed to and fro , meantime , in a state approaching distraction ;
“ are you staying to talk ?
“ it is striking four , ” i answered .
you wouldn’t let any enemy hurt me , if you could prevent it ?
” i replied ;
at every glance retired colder and farther ;
nothing hindered me from eating heartily , and i experienced a certain sense of satisfaction and superiority , as , at intervals , i cast a look towards my silent companions , and felt the comfort of a quiet conscience within me .
the snow began to drive thickly .
“ you shall be sorry to be yourself presently , ” said her father-in-law , “ if you stand there another minute .
” whispered my dear little mistress .
she’s relentless .
now it seemed wrong to refrain .
it took his breath for a minute ;
for though he spoke little of it , he still felt the same horror and detestation of his ancient enemy that had occupied his heart ever since mrs linton’s death .
from pity and charity !
a deep sigh being the only answer i could obtain to my frequent entreaties that she would try to rest .
“ we’re dismal enough without conjuring up ghosts and visions to perplex us .
our first thought , on his departure , was to force an exit somewhere .
and hareton has been cast out like an unfledged dunnock !
let me hear how it came to pass .
” he inquired , looking very serious .
or rather himself ;
as to hareton earnshaw , if i see him listen to you , i’ll send him seeking his bread where he can get it !
we each had our tasks , and hers was to wait on linton :
“ and you’ll be my friend ?
and when i went to call them to supper , i could discover them nowhere .
he glanced fearfully towards the heights , begging she would remain another half-hour , at least .
though we be in an out-of-the-way place .
i cannot express it ;
i believe i may assert that they were really in possession of deep and growing happiness .
then raising herself up all burning , desired that i would open the window .
were i in your place , i would frame high notions of my birth ;
well , you must allow me to leap over some three years ;
cathy had been caught in the fact of plundering , or , at least , hunting out the nests of the grouse .
“ begone , for god’s sake , and hide your vixen face !
and there ” his voice died in a whimper .
and you love edgar , and edgar loves you .
mrs linton bent forward , and listened breathlessly .
and zillah willingly acquiesced , being a narrow-minded , selfish woman .
he is willing to let us be friends , at least ;
poor thing !
mrs dean was about to recommence , when i advanced ;
but there were so many hillocks and banks to climb and pass , that , at length , i began to be weary , and told her we must halt , and retrace our steps .
how will you take it , ungrateful brute ?
she would not hear of staying a second longer :
in her eagerness she rose and supported herself on the arm of the chair .
a sad thing it will be for us all , but a blessing for him !
and there they were fast again .
i wonder how you would like to pass those fearful nights !
there was a man servant left to keep the house with me , and we generally made a practice of locking the doors during the hours of service ;
ye marred , wearisome nowt !
he stepped forward , and called him by name , and touched his shoulder ;
an elevated hollow , near a swamp , whose peaty moisture is said to answer all the purposes of embalming on the few corpses deposited there .
” cried a deep voice (the rider’s) , “ i’m glad to meet you .
“ i’ll not listen to your slanders .
“ throw it , ” he replied , standing still , “ and then i’ll tell how you boasted that you would turn me out of doors as soon as he died , and see whether he will not turn you out directly .
“ it’s a good opportunity , now that master is away , ” i answered aloud :
“ well , ellen , you won’t cry about it , will you ?
who never , to my recollection , repaid his indulgence by any sign of gratitude .
and now you’d better go !
and now , i was sure , the other would be a source of equal satisfaction .
and i thought heathcliff himself less guilty than i .
and she would compel me to find out business below , that she might accompany me .
i waited five minutes , but getting no answer left him .
“ happy , master ?
look , i’m not a stranger !
you’ll not go , then ?
“ but you’ve made yourself ill by crying and being in a passion .
i can give them no attention any more .
tell isabella to shun me ;
“ but i shall never feel at ease till i know .
but trouble me with no more secrets :
mind !
” said linton , addressing her ;
i obeyed the hint ;
but his self-love would endure no further torment :
” exclaimed catherine , flying to attack me next with her lavish caresses .
i’ll open it myself .
but the house , inside , had regained its ancient aspect of comfort under female management , and the scenes of riot common in hindley’s time were not now enacted within its walls .
dear me !
“ no , i don’t wish to go upstairs , ” he said .
i was embarrassed how to punish him when i discovered his part in the business :
she scornfully withdrew .
“ you cannot deny that you entered my house of your own accord , in contempt of his injunctions to the contrary .
“ umph !
linton complied ;
but how to do it i did not know .
i thought or should die soon !
” i cried , sorrowfully .
there were some persons sitting at cards ;
heathcliff stood at the open door ;
ellen !
edgar will not hurt us .
“ oh !
he seemed rarely pleased indeed ;
there was a talk of two or three minutes , and he returned alone .
it was a testament , in lean type , and smelling dreadfully musty :
it takes my breath .
how strong you are !
the world is surely not worth living in now , is it ?
” she replied .
ah , i thought , there will be no saving him :
i told them i intended by no means to encourage their tricks :
the fire does make it smart .
and i like to be dirty , and i will be dirty .
“ she does not know what she says .
i shall love mine yet ;
“ here !
“ mr heathcliff , ” said i , “ this is the talk of a madman ;
but catherine’s tears were more powerful than ours .
i should get better at the bare sight of it , in spite of kenneth .
“ but you are acquainted with the earnshaws’ violent dispositions , and mrs linton caps them all .
he would not even have seen after their going to church on sundays , only joseph and the curate reprimanded his carelessness when they absented themselves ;
“ answer me that .
and catherine wishing to keep up your acquaintance , i acquiesced foolishly .
“ should you wish it , i’ll settle with you now , ” and i drew my note-book from my pocket .
he many a time spoke sternly to me about my pertness ;
in a few seconds she stretched herself out stiff , and turned up her eyes , while her cheeks , at once blanched and livid , assumed the aspect of death .
“ yes , when i am upstairs , ” he answered ;
it is impossible that you can covet the admiration of heathcliff that you consider him an agreeable person !
is she here ?
and she sprang up as gay as a fairy , sheltered by her wide-brimmed hat and gauze veil from the july sun , and trotted off with a merry laugh , mocking my cautious counsel to avoid galloping , and come back early .
“ no , ” i answered , “ nor next day neither .
i shouted to her , as she had outstripped me a long way ;
and cathy couldn’t bear that prospect :
“ what a noise for nothing !
but she’s a real little fool .
i confess it with shame shrunk icily into myself , like a snail ;
but they burned with anguish :
and , however miserable you make us , we shall still have the revenge of thinking that your cruelty arises from your greater misery .
but if ever he heard me answer sharply , or saw any other servant grow cloudy at some imperious order of hers , he would show his trouble by a frown of displeasure that never darkened on his own account .
its owner stood behind ;
” he shouted .
“ tak’ it , ” he added , thrusting the tray into my hand .
you could knock him down in a twinkling ;
she knew them both directly .
oh , papa !
as soon as he recovered , i related our compulsory visit , and detention at the heights .
“ what , linton !
and heathcliff bid us be damned .
“ because i won’t give you your death of cold , ” i answered .
” he said .
addressing me in accents of indignant disappointment :
“ zillah left , and mr heathcliff wished me to come , soon after you went to london , and stay till you returned .
a beast of a servant came up with a lantern , at last , shouting keep fast , skulker , keep fast !’ he changed his note , however , when he saw skulker’s game .
unspeakably consoled .
“ damnable witch !
almost forgetting what he had in his hands .
she did fly up , asking how he could fashion to bring that gipsy brat into the house , when they had their own bairns to feed and fend for ?
you are the favoured possessor of the beneficent fairy , ” i remarked , turning to my neighbour .
she had little time to reflect .
mrs linton sat in a loose white dress , with a light shawl over her shoulders , in the recess of the open window , as usual .
“ it is needless .
i give you what i have :
“ incomparably beyond and above us all !
“ what is the matter , love ?
but he would suffer it on no account .
there was such anguish in the gush of grief that accompanied this raving , that my compassion made me overlook its folly , and i drew off , half angry to have listened at all , and vexed at having related my ridiculous nightmare , since it produced that agony ;
i closed it , and returned to my post .
i called at the village , and asked him to accompany me .
cathy begged that he might be liberated then , as isabella linton had no partner :
i could fancy a love for life here almost possible ;
he told his wife the same story , and she seemed to believe him ;
” i said .
and go up now and then to get her what is needful ;
it was extremely funny .
i promise to marry linton :
the master told me to light a fire in the many-weeks’ deserted parlour , and to set an easy-chair in the sunshine by the window ;
and i thowt i’d lug my books up into t’ garret , and all my bits o’ stuff , and they sud hev’ t’ kitchen to theirseln ;
he patted minny’s neck , and said she was a bonny beast , and appeared as if he wanted me to speak to him .
he had his hand in her hair ;
“ i’ve not waited for you to learn that .
and the more hurt she gets , the more venomous she grows .
would you have tears for him ?
and wheedle my father out of all he has :
“ nobody is out there but joseph .
the tone in which the words were said revealed a genuine bad nature .
there was a restless , anxious expression in his countenance , i had never remarked there before ;
“ stay one minute , ” i began .
“ get him something that he can eat , that’s all .
“ a wicked boy , at all events ,’ remarked the old lady , and quite unfit for a decent house !
let us go , ellen .
“ how can you say i am harsh , you naughty fondling ?
in the confluence of the multitude , several clubs crossed ;
by the fire stood a ruffianly child , strong in limb and dirty in garb , with a look of catherine in his eyes and about his mouth .
and how papa would object to my going :
i did not close my eyes that night , nor did mr linton :
and cathy , when she learned the master had lost her whip in attending on the stranger , showed her humour by grinning and spitting at the stupid little thing ;
and the congratulation on their long-postponed meeting to an anxious inquiry , whether he were worse than usual ?
when i reached the heights , i explained that i had come to see everything carried on decently ;
“ and he’ll soon detest you as much as i do .
i wish it were over !
the room was filled with the damp , mild air of the cloudy evening ;
but he said it would change if the air blew on it , and so i struck one side of the coffin loose , and covered it up :
mr earnshaw , provided he saw him healthy and never heard him cry , was contented , as far as regarded him .
it is a foolish story to assert that catherine could not bear to see me ;
“ i’ve gone very near with papa .
i had a similar notion ;
his visits were a continual nightmare to me ;
every linton on the face of the earth might melt into nothing before i could consent to forsake heathcliff .
“ both he and joseph are off , and i think they won’t return this hour or more .
and how long were you in the hole ?
her face he couldn’t see , and she couldn’t see him .
“ no i have to scold them every evening for their late rambles :
and he wished to remedy it and please you .
i couldn’t abide to be present at their meeting .
wuthering heights is the name of mr heathcliff’s dwelling .
“ judas !
have you been to wuthering heights ?
and what amuses her is painful to me beyond expression .
“ say you forgive me , hareton , do .
” but as soon as she saw him vexed again , she kissed his hand , and said she would sing him to sleep .
i would not strike him with my fist , but i’d kick him with my foot , and experience considerable satisfaction .
i could not guess the use that either would be of , then .
he probably raised the phantoms from thinking , as he traversed the moors alone , on the nonsense he had heard his parents and companions repeat .
because i’m weak , my brain got confused , and i screamed unconsciously .
“ but papa says you would love me better than him and all the world , if you were my wife ;
i may say this ;
oh , damn it !
the latter had never been under-drawn :
to think how mr linton charged me to keep you in ;
” asked heathcliff , having satisfied himself that the limbs were all equally frail and feeble .
hareton grew black as a thunder-cloud at this childish speech .
” he muttered , sitting down , and stroking his ribbed stockings from the knee to the ankle .
“ oh , for mercy’s sake , ” interrupted the mistress , stamping her foot , “ for mercy’s sake , let us hear no more of it now !
so , at the conclusion of her morning studies , she resorted to the solace of the drawer .
i shall be incomparably beyond and above you all .
heathcliff arrived underneath just at the critical moment ;
for when heathcliff expressed contempt of linton in his presence , she could not half coincide , as she did in his absence ;
then , having handed their chairs forward , i left the room .
oh , heathcliff , you are showing a poor spirit !
we parted that night hostile ;
it was entirely out of the question .
i stole into the nearest doorway .
shook himself , indeed , as if his flesh crept with aversion ;
she threw at me a very naughty look , so naughty that i would not kiss her good-night at first :
how can i bear it ?
he refuses to open his mouth , except to utter pettish , silly speeches ;
infantile in manners , though possessed of keen wit , keen feelings , and a keen temper , too , if irritated .
” i observed .
or make a fortune more promptly on the english highways ?
still , i thought i could detect in his physiognomy a mind owning better qualities than his father ever possessed .
“ hey , gnasher !
i shall set out for london next week ;
“ no , no , ” she replied :
we knew she was really better , and , therefore , decided that long confinement to a single place produced much of this despondency , and it might be partially removed by a change of scene .
” i exclaimed .
“ hold your noise !
“ my young lady is looking sadly the worse for her change of condition , ” i remarked .
and branderham , unwilling to remain idle , poured forth his zeal in a shower of loud taps on the boards of the pulpit , which responded so smartly that , at last , to my unspeakable relief , they woke me .
and there was no prevailing on him to take a step in the way of moving upward , when he found he must , necessarily , sink beneath his former level .
can i do you any good ?
i had not courage to walk straight into the apartment ;
because misery and degradation , and death , and nothing that god or satan could inflict would have parted us , you , of your own will , did it .
and he is taller and bigger altogether .
i have passed it really in my walks , twice or thrice ;
tell me that .
you are my cousin , and you shall own me .
they’ll blight you they’ll damn you .
having approached this structure , i looked inside , and perceived it to be a singular sort of old-fashioned couch , very conveniently designed to obviate the necessity for every member of the family having a room to himself .
his first act was to elevate his torch to a level with my face , squint malignantly , project his under-lip , and turn away .
tell me now , can you ?
meanwhile , the infant ruffian continued sucking ;
he was charmed with two or three pretty songs your songs , ellen ;
and , finally , frightened by my assertions that i would tell papa , and that he should be put in prison and hanged , he commenced blubbering himself , and hurried out to hide his cowardly agitation .
he drew back in consternation .
“ yes , ” i remarked , “ you’ve seen a good many alterations , i suppose ?
i’m going with it to the library ;
to whom should she mention me if i am a forbidden topic in the house ?
i’ve a very good mind to shake you severely , for your contemptible treachery , and your imbecile conceit .
and this thing won’t be settled while you linger about it .
” she asked .
” was his constant bitter reflection ;
“ yes :
he contented himself with going a bit farther back and looking at her instead of the book .
you’re a heartless , selfish boy !
“ she lies with a sweet smile on her face ;
“ he explained it , ” she replied .
he has startled and distressed me shockingly !
edgar had not the heart to pass it ;
“ but i don’t like the carving-knife , mr hindley , ” i answered ;
yesterday was bright , calm , and frosty .
“ oh , all children love their parents , ” i said .
begin .
who , absorbed in his anguish , seemed insensible to anything around him :
“ t’ maister’s down i’ t’ fowld .
i niver did think to see t’ day that i mud lave th’ owld place but i doubt it’s nigh at hand !
“ once in a way , that is permitted .
i delivered this message to mrs earnshaw ;
i descended , and found heathcliff waiting under the porch , evidently anticipating an invitation to enter .
what was filling him with dread we had no means of discerning ;
“ i shall not refuse to go out of doors , ” he answered ;
he was beyond my skill to quiet or console !
i returned to her apartment , extinguished my candle , and seated myself in the window .
as we talked , we neared a door that opened on the road ;
“ you suppose papa is highly esteemed and respected , then ?
to beard a magistrate in his stronghold , and on the sabbath , too !
both doors and lattices were open ;
it is enough !
i have now heard all my neighbour’s history , at different sittings , as the housekeeper could spare time from more important occupations .
the snow lay yards deep in our road ;
of course i do , ” she answered .
how i writhed , and yawned , and nodded , and revived !
this hint was enough to bind our hands .
but i have nothing else to offer .
” “ yes , ” she answered , without altering the direction of her eyes .
“ night-walking amuses him , then , ” i remarked , affecting a careless manner :
i stared she stared also :
and i fancied i guessed the incitement to his secret studies also .
hold your tongue , you foul-mouthed thief , you !
he was christened linton , and , from the first , she reported him to be an ailing , peevish creature .
this is quite an easy interval .
nor need anything be said over me .
and happen you’re right :
the carriage stopped ;
catherine took her station by the lattice , and watched anxiously for morning ;
“ certainly i shall , ” she said ;
i took my dingy volume by the scroop , and hurled it into the dog-kennel , vowing i hated a good book .
how i pinched and pricked myself , and rubbed my eyes , and stood up , and sat down again , and nudged joseph to inform me if he would ever have done .
it includes kitchen and parlour , generally ;
” he exclaimed .
“ i wouldn’t be you for a kingdom , then !
“ your son ?
she was not a gossip , i feared ;
i entered , and beheld my stray lamb seated on the hearth , rocking herself in a little chair that had been her mother’s when a child .
” i inquired .
as soon as you become mrs linton , he loses friend , and love , and all !
she did not offer them to him , for she saw further notice would only weary and annoy .
“ why have i made him angry , by taking your part , then , a hundred times ?
and then his blood ;
but it is past .
her spirit was high , though not rough , and qualified by a heart sensitive and lively to excess in its affections .
but her ingenuity was at work to remedy the injury :
“ and because he loves me .
watched the moths fluttering among the heath and harebells , listened to the soft wind breathing through the grass , and wondered how any one could ever imagine unquiet slumbers for the sleepers in that quiet earth .
and then seated myself at the stairs’-head , hid my face in my hands , and cried .
“ gimmerton ?
i had been over-intent on watching the pair outside to mark her entrance .
“ excuse me , ” i responded ;
and my memory unavoidably recurred to former times with a sort of oppressive sadness .
“ were you asked to tea ?
he muttered detached words also ;
“ it was yourself , mrs linton :
“ oh , you dunce !’ i said , laughing heartily at his failure .
her life closed in a gentle dream may she wake as kindly in the other world !
all that i did learn was on occasion of going to aid in the preparations for the funeral .
but i was not going to disobey the master :
do you think they do ?
but only her own assurance could make me admit the horrible idea again .
“ bad , still .
but she already partook of the pervading spirit of neglect which encompassed her .
that’s as mamma used to do , whole afternoons together .
mincing un’ munching !
“ stop !
and i shall have the blame .
“ that they what ?
having received his orders , i despatched a man to fetch the attorney , and four more , provided with serviceable weapons , to demand my young lady of her jailor .
“ take the road you came , ” she answered , ensconcing herself in a chair , with a candle , and the long book open before her .
his heavy sighs succeeding each other so thick as to leave no space for common breathing between .
he dreams of you day and night , and cannot be persuaded that you don’t hate him , since you neither write nor call .
i left her because she would not hold her tongue ;
heathcliff had moved to the window , and hung his head , somewhat cowed by her violent rating apparently .
mr earnshaw vouchsafed no answer .
mr earnshaw snatched up the culprit directly and conveyed him to his chamber ;
“ and that wind sounding in the firs by the lattice .
she was vexed , but she did not proceed .
last night i was in the grange garden six hours , and i’ll return there to-night ;
“ give me some tea , i’m thirsty , and then i’ll tell you , ” he answered .
he evidently wished no repetition of my intrusion .
“ remove them yourself , ” she said , pushing them from her as soon as she had done ;
his eyes , wide and wet , at last flashed fiercely on her ;
happily , an inhabitant of the kitchen made more dispatch ;
“ you shall have tea before you go home , ” he added .
and he grew bitter with brooding over these injuries .
“ give it .
no !
you mustn’t scold him either , mind .
“ oh , i’ll take good care , ” i continued :
for , after the struggle , he trembled , in spite of himself , to his very finger-ends .
of my wild endeavours to hold my right ;
as if he fancied i only intended to tempt and disappoint him .
that coldness melted as fast as snow in april , and ere the tiny thing could stammer a word or totter a step it wielded a despot’s sceptre in his heart .
“ no wonder the grass grows up between the flags , and cattle are the only hedge-cutters .
i should not have spoken so if i had known her true condition , but i could not get rid of the notion that she acted a part of her disorder .
but , immediately dashing the water from her lashes , she recommenced .
but then my mistress had kissed him first , and i plainly saw that he could hardly bear , for downright agony , to look into her face !
“ some one mistress does not expect , ” i replied .
a stout , hearty lass like catherine does not fall ill for a trifle ;
and , on the very day of his return , he told joseph and me we must thenceforth quarter ourselves in the back-kitchen , and leave the house for him .
and , threatening serious consequences if he did not look sharp home , i remained under the wall and perused miss cathy’s affectionate composition .
to-day , i am within sight of my heaven .
i like her too well , my dear heathcliff , to let you absolutely seize and devour her up .
but compelled speedily to drive off the remembrance .
so , when catherine came , half forgetting her former insults , he tried to make himself agreeable , by the housekeeper’s account .
being unable to remove the chain , i jumped over , and , running up the flagged causeway bordered with straggling gooseberry-bushes , knocked vainly for admittance , till my knuckles tingled and the dogs howled .
he grasped the handle of the door , and shook it :
” cried cathy , with a scornful laugh .
i heard him draw a pleasant picture to zillah of what he would do if he were as strong as i :
“ he’s a bird of bad omen :
and you shall receive a kind welcome .
how can i ?
“ no !
and so she ran on , till i relinquished the endeavour to convince her of her mistake .
for i mustn’t come , if i have hurt you .
and instead of leaping three years , i will be content to pass to the next summer the summer of 1778 , that is nearly twenty-three years ago .
“ no , no , dear , i’m not tired , ” i returned , continually .
“ i sha’n’t speak to you , mr heathcliff , ” answered catherine .
and the girl relishing his pert and spiteful sayings , without considering the ill-nature they evinced .
one time i passed the old gate , going out of my way , on a journey to gimmerton .
this was especially to be remarked if any one attempted to impose upon , or domineer over , his favourite :
“ no !
” said catherine , shutting the inner door .
hasn’t he hareton for a companion ?
you’re worse than a heathen treating your own flesh and blood in that manner !
“ have you nothing to show your cousin anywhere about , not even a rabbit or a weasel’s nest ?
for some days after that evening , mr heathcliff shunned meeting us at meals ;
miss linton , take your seat by him .
now , i wish you were a mile or two up those hills :
a quart of ale on the table near him , bristling with large pieces of toasted oat-cake ;
i had cathy by the hand , and was urging her on , when all at once she fell down .
heathcliff’s talk was outrageous , after you left us ;
” he said , shaking the white flakes from his clothes ;
and an odd thing happened to me about a month ago .
don’t look sad and downcast , as you are doing he’ll be angry .
but that’s worse than i expected and the devil knows i was not sanguine !
at least , i couldn’t bear longer suspense , and stole off once more .
i shrank reluctantly from performing my errand ;
she hadn’t as much to live for .
and the house juno mounts sentinel there , and nay , you can only ramble about the steps and passages .
indeed , i hate them all :
miss linton , i shall enjoy myself remarkably in thinking your father will be miserable :
has the whelp been playing that game long ?
you may , however , fall out , at last , over something of equal consequence to both sides ;
“ he’s your son .
i opened it it was very short .
and i thought , too , it might create a favourable crisis in catherine’s mental illness :
would it not be a kindness to the country to hang him at once , before he shows his nature in acts as well as features ?’ he pulled me under the chandelier , and mrs linton placed her spectacles on her nose and raised her hands in horror .
or we should be sitting in flaming fagots , i suppose , ” retorted the singer .
and hell shall have his soul !
” she screamed , darting her hand into the fire , and drawing forth some half-consumed fragments , at the expense of her fingers .
an unreclaimed creature , without refinement , without cultivation ;
and slates jutted off , here and there , beyond the right line of the roof , to be gradually worked off in coming autumn storms .
“ and if you do turn him out of doors , i’ll go with him .
“ the lord help us !
“ they wish me to hate it too , do they ?
rather slovenly , perhaps , yet not looking amiss with his negligence , because he has an erect and handsome figure ;
the greatest punishment we could invent for her was to keep her separate from him :
that the mistress would allow her to be nothing in the house , and edgar neglected her ;
and don’t harass him much by talking :
“ and what are those golden rocks like when you stand under them ?
“ i should be sorry to think so , ” returned his companion .
for one thing , she was forbidden to move out of the garden , and it fretted her sadly to be confined to its narrow bounds as spring drew on ;
and i think the concentrated essence of all the madness in the world took up its abode in my brain the day i linked my fate with theirs !
mrs dean laughed .
and used that weapon , and her tongue , to such purpose , that the storm subsided magically , and she only remained , heaving like a sea after a high wind , when her master entered on the scene .
and that served to repress all startling demonstrations of feeling .
and after sucking out his last wreath , and heaving a profound sigh , he got up , and departed as solemnly as he came .
be content , you always followed me !
sit down ;
and i’d thank his uncle to be quick , and go before him !
i cannot escort you .
but he discovered enough to encourage him to speak .
heathcliff , i’m proud to show you , at last , somebody that dotes on you more than myself .
in the first place , his startling likeness to catherine connected him fearfully with her .
hereafter she is only my sister in name :
“ he calls him a sneaking fool .
what do you say ?
“ wisht !
the first thing she saw me do , on coming out of the grange , was to hang up her little dog ;
mr heathcliff has just honoured me with a call .
you tempt him to wring them , till he forces a cry of humiliation .
” i repeated .
the voice has no resemblance to his .
i walked as if for a wager , mile after mile , till a turn brought me in view of the heights ;
“ then i can go , too , when i am a woman .
a more elastic footstep entered next ;
he did not proceed to his ordinary chamber , but turned into that with the panelled bed :
you are so much happier than i am , you ought to be better .
but nobody seemed at hand .
“ you’ll be the favourite among us , hareton !
” then she began describing with hysterical emotion the effect it produced on her to see black ;
i was surprised to witness how coolly the child gathered himself up , and went on with his intention ;
but , mr lockwood , i forget these tales cannot divert you .
it was the consequence of his strange illness , not the cause .
i returned to my work .
taking care , however , to lay nothing at the door of my weak will or deficient affection .
no , don’t turn away !
“ how should we do ?
“ you’ll keep that ?
“ no , miss cathy , ” i would answer ;
but i succeeded in abstracting the epistle ;
dark night coming down prematurely , and sky and hills mingled in one bitter whirl of wind and suffocating snow .
” whatever i did , that idea would bother me :
“ like him !
and he’s afraid of my dying if we wait ;
“ so make haste , ellen !
” whispered the little wretch , rousing a half-bred bull-dog from its lair in a corner .
“ put that hat on , and home at once , ” said i .
he told me to fetch some water .
edgar linton had difficulty in hearing me to the close .
still , he has no right to appropriate what is mine , and make it ridiculous to me with his vile mistakes and mispronunciations !
i can’t endure you !
and so you’ve found me out .
he moves me differently :
it’s odd what a savage feeling i have to anything that seems afraid of me !
i said i should fall asleep in his ;
i met him on the road and asked .
but his constitution defies him .
oh , god !
“ yes , that’s all the good that such a brute as you can get from them !
is it really you ?
and you will have such nice rambles on the moors .
” heathcliff’s countenance relaxed into a grin .
“ and that young lady , mrs heathcliff , is his widow ?
the down is flying about like snow .
i wish you would speak rationally .
and her latest ideas wandered back to pleasant early days .
” he exclaimed , ferociously , “ and let me be !
i can’t sit here .
she hastened to fetch it before i could refuse , and i heard joseph asking whether “ it warn’t a crying scandal that she should have followers at her time of life ?
not entirely for sorrow ;
during which examination linton ceased crying , and lifted his great blue eyes to inspect the inspector .
about her i won’t speak ;
and if you were the latter , you would live with us , and papa would be as fond of you as he is of me .
and a bad one will turn the bonniest into something worse than ugly .
that is how i’m loved !
she was not artful , never played the coquette , and had evidently an objection to her two friends meeting at all ;
rendered worse than unavailing .
and there he was , laid over the settle :
“ if you strike me , hareton will strike you , ” she said ;
“ with that i shut the window and returned to my place by the fire ;
finally , beguiling him to accompany her .
“ she does not seem so amiable , ” i thought , “ as mrs dean would persuade me to believe .
it won’t ?
while i got up , and opened my mouth , to commence a downright torrent of abuse .
i’ll do both , as soon as i possibly can .
you must represent the peril of quitting that policy , and remind him of my passionate temper , verging , when kindled , on frenzy .
a fireplace hung with cut-paper , dropping to pieces ;
he seemed convulsed with exquisite terror .
do you know that you run a risk of being lost in the marshes ?
presuming every now and then to bid me wisht ,’ and denying that it was his fault ;
poor soul !
he was dead and stark !
“ linton is just six months younger than i am , ” she chattered , as we strolled leisurely over the swells and hollows of mossy turf , under shadow of the trees .
the vallances hung in festoons , wrenched from their rings , and the iron rod supporting them was bent in an arc on one side , causing the drapery to trail upon the floor .
“ but then ,’ i continued , holding myself ready to flee , if poor catherine had trusted you , and assumed the ridiculous , contemptible , degrading title of mrs heathcliff , she would soon have presented a similar picture !
“ why , where the devil is the use on’t ?
in an arch under the dresser reposed a huge , liver-coloured bitch pointer , surrounded by a swarm of squealing puppies ;
“ what is the matter , my little man ?
” cried hindley , threatening him with an iron weight used for weighing potatoes and hay .
but a minute’s reflection convinced me it was not my ghostly catherine .
you must prepare her ask her if i may come .
it was named catherine ;
i thought , though everybody hated and despised each other , they could not avoid loving me .
“ that’s very strange !
we were busy with the hay in a far-away field , when the girl that usually brought our breakfasts came running an hour too soon across the meadow and up the lane , calling me as she ran .
“ has he fallen into a lethargy , or is he dead ?
be quiet !
but i’ll take this walk every morning in future :
i never would have banished him from her society as long as she desired his .
joseph was an elderly , nay , an old man , very old , perhaps , though hale and sinewy .
“ i promised mamma that i wouldn’t say one word to him , and i didn’t .
“ he’s younger than i , ” she answered , after a protracted pause of meditation , “ and he ought to live the longest :
what else could it be that made me pass such a terrible night ?
remember this neighbour’s goods are mine .
catherine repeated the longest she could remember .
but i believed a person who could plan the turning of her fits of passion to account , beforehand , might , by exerting her will , manage to control herself tolerably , even while under their influence ;
he shifted his grasp from her head to her arm , and gazed intently in her face .
i’m a woman .
but i might stay and order the arrangements for the funeral , if i chose .
and , if you choose , you may say good-bye :
he does , frequently , walk out on the hills .
“ attentive ?
say you have not ?
they have let the bull-dog loose , and he holds me !’ the devil had seized her ankle , nelly :
“ i shall think it a dream to-morrow !
“ you’ll do well , ” replied i .
i want to see whether they have made their nests yet .
the youth grew crimson , and clenched his fist , with every appearance of a meditated assault .
he entered and motioning him out , shut the door .
are we going to murder folk on our very door-stones ?
why should you be anxious to conceal them ?
her appointed companion did not pretend to escort her :
though he looked as if he did not relish my intrusion .
i imagined , for a moment , that this piece of eloquence was addressed to me ;
“ i asked if he liked mr heathcliff .
and deep into summer i have found snow under that black hollow on the north-east side !
no , no , isabella , you sha’n’t run off , ” she continued , arresting , with feigned playfulness , the confounded girl , who had risen indignantly .
i felt the terrible news must be told , and i longed to get it over ;
“ what business brings you here to-night ?
and he’d but i’ll not repeat his language , nor describe his habitual conduct :
“ i felt he spoke the truth ;
he called me a pitiful , shuffling , worthless thing ;
you are younger , and yet , i’ll be bound , you are taller and twice as broad across the shoulders ;
“ i won’t be named a dog in the manger again .
you’ve acquainted me , ellen , with your old master’s habits .
this is the last thing of his i have about me :
” i ventured to inquire ;
but it annoyed me so much , that i resolved to silence it , if possible ;
and , this time , the person entered the room .
i could have taken oath it had been six .
and my young lady , lightening into sunshine again , climbed up and seated herself on the top of the wall , reaching over to gather some hips that bloomed scarlet on the summit branches of the wild-rose trees shadowing the highway side :
catherine met it with her accustomed look of nervousness and yet defiance , which he abhorred .
i felt some sentiment that it must be a judgment on us also .
“ oh , such a grand bairn !
“ what fiend possesses you to stare back at me , continually , with those infernal eyes ?
i inquired of him if he had seen our young lady .
“ did she take due warning , then ?
i saw they were full of stupid admiration ;
but my sleep was marred a second time by a sharp ringing of the bell the only bell we have , put up on purpose for linton ;
she never shall !
” cried catherine in a passion .
“ i’m certain you do , ” retorted isabella ;
the surprise bewilders me it will put her out of her head !
he cursed you , i dare say , for coming into the world (i did , at least) ;
” i cried angrily ;
or else you concealed them in the bad spirit that , as you cannot enjoy them , nobody else shall .
i didn’t like to hear him talk !
your bliss lies , like his , in inflicting misery .
zillah , zillah !
he had hard work to stir me ;
nelly , take her ;
he only told me he wanted me , and he was tired of seeing catherine :
it serves as a guide-post to the grange , the heights , and village .
i didn’t know that , to humour her , i should wink at mr heathcliff .
catherine had an awfully perverted taste to esteem him so dearly , knowing him so well .
he’s a fierce , pitiless , wolfish man .
and small loss to his family whenever he drops off .
the moment her regard ceased , i would have torn his heart out , and drunk his blood !
i’m sure mr edgar will excuse me .
“ papa told you not to say any bad words , and you can’t open your mouth without one .
then laughed , and threw it from her .
“ silence , eavesdropper !
” i interrupted , dragging the pillow away , and turning the holes towards the mattress , for she was removing its contents by handfuls .
” he answered again .
“ hush , hush !
in every cloud , in every tree filling the air at night , and caught by glimpses in every object by day i am surrounded with her image !
“ hush , master heathcliff !
nelly , if you be tired you may sit down ;
before we reached home , catherine’s displeasure softened into a perplexed sensation of pity and regret , largely blended with vague , uneasy doubts about linton’s actual circumstances , physical and social :
i explained that they were bare masses of stone , with hardly enough earth in their clefts to nourish a stunted tree .
but i’m glad i’ve a better , to forgive it ;
“ oh , ellen !
” “ probably not , ” i responded .
whereas , if i marry linton i can aid heathcliff to rise , and place him out of my brother’s power .
though he seldom before had revealed this state of mind , even by looks , it was his habitual mood , i had no doubt :
it was more simple and more eloquent than her cousin’s :
i don’t mean that i despise you .
she flung the tea back , spoon and all , and resumed her chair in a pet ;
and i suppose he must have his share of the dainties as well as we .
and children of his age seldom have a natural pleasure in soap and water .
i can hardly bear to see him .
asking myself what good there would be in disturbing his last moments with information that he had neither power nor opportunity to turn to account .
one was marked c .
not because i disown her , but because she has disowned me .
come away :
since early morning she had been busy ordering her own small affairs ;
“ i shall not , ” replied the boy , finding his tongue at last ;
being alone , and conscious two yards of loose earth was the sole barrier between us , i said to myself i’ll have her in my arms again !
” i asked .
at the farmhouse i visited in coming from penistone crags .
“ i’m not to re-enter it without you !
hush !
and he preached good god !
he was leaning against the ledge of an open lattice , but not looking out :
he took to heathcliff strangely , believing all he said (for that matter , he said precious little , and generally the truth) , and petting him up far above cathy , who was too mischievous and wayward for a favourite .
“ oh , i hope you’ll die in a garret , starved to death !
he did it with a courtesy that redounded to his credit .
but the frost had set in , and , in spite of her pride , she was forced to condescend to our company , more and more .
they entirely refused to have it in bed with them , or even in their room ;
and then by the time linton gets to us he’ll not know which is which !
” i said .
i distinguished a moor-sheep cropping the short turf on the graves .
and then , i hope , miss cathy will think twice before she takes the cockatrice !
and if he could not be gracious , kept out of the way .
perhaps he had fallen into a doze .
heathcliff approached the fire , where my mistress and i stood silent .
“ you’d better hold your tongue , now , ” he answered fiercely .
and i don’t like being left by myself in this grim house :
you could be free instantly .
“ i won’t have them now , ” she answered .
” she cried , catching my dress .
if you do , i’ll keep you .
the young master being entirely negligent how they behaved , and what they did , so they kept clear of him .
unless about her own affairs , and those could hardly interest me .
“ i do .
“ is any one here ?
i’ve taught him to scorn everything extra-animal as silly and weak .
” demanded her father-in-law , much surprised .
and , rousing from a dismal doze after a night of weeping , i lifted my hand to push the panels aside :
” exclaimed catherine , who could not hear the latter part of his speech .
“ hush , hush !
“ mr heathcliff , it’s very wrong , ” i continued :
and till then her coffin remained uncovered , and strewn with flowers and scented leaves , in the great drawing-room .
“ i fret about nothing on earth except papa’s illness , ” answered my companion .
and you may fancy my first fright was not much allayed when i had had leisure to examine her .
you’ll see nothing to provoke you .
i dared hardly lift my eyes from the page before me , that melancholy scene so instantly usurped its place .
who knows but he might take our part ?
“ no accident , i hope ?
“ they are good children , no doubt , and don’t deserve the treatment you receive , for your bad conduct .
by that , i judged it to be six o’clock ;
and stand you aside !
” i asked :
the figure almost too graceful .
“ but i cannot tell how to do ,’ she said ;
“ but where did he come from , the little dark thing , harboured by a good man to his bane ?
then what good is it discussing the matter ?
he was asleep in a corner , wrapped in a warm , fur-lined cloak , as if it had been winter .
i’d fling in bowl un’ all , if i wer ye !
i only wish to hear from herself how she is , and why she has been ill ;
we didn’t want his help .
wish that he were dead , i must ;
there she had a son born a few months subsequent to her escape .
“ wash away your spleen , ” he said .
yon’ heathcliff’s run off wi’ her !
she paused , and hid her face in the folds of my gown ;
she ran , and returned and ran again , many times before my sober footsteps reached the gate , and then she seated herself on the grassy bank beside the path , and tried to wait patiently ;
and , had the invalid been presentable , i’ve no doubt his father would have permitted him to come .
and i could not see how they shouldn’t both have taken the same road , for good or evil .
and he must always have sweets and dainties , and always milk , milk for ever heeding naught how the rest of us are pinched in winter ;
“ but he goes on to the moors frequently , since the shooting season commenced ;
especially as i felt that , however the scene closed , we should all be driven asunder for nobody knows how long !
but that does not bind me not to laugh at him !
“ i sudn’t shift for nelly nasty ill nowt as shoo is .
before he dismounted , i went and opened the door .
that’s right , look at her .
“ if you are called upon in a court of law , you’ll remember her language , nelly !
cannot you inform him that it is frightful earnest ?
“ gone to heaven , i hope ;
nay , we’ve noa parlours .
now , if it had been hareton !
you have killed me and thriven on it , i think .
“ a beautiful animal !
and and , if you did meet my father , and he asked you about me , don’t lead him to suppose that i’ve been extremely silent and stupid :
he then took a stone , struck down the division between two windows , and sprang in .
we mun side out and seearch another .
he surveyed the carved front and low-browed lattices , the straggling gooseberry-bushes and crooked firs , with solemn intentness , and then shook his head :
though she said nothing .
“ i want to drink , ” he exclaimed fretfully , turning away .
“ yes ;
for they were delivered in perfect sincerity ;
superstition urged me to comply with this impulse :
for there is scarcely cause .
the twelve years , continued mrs dean , following that dismal period were the happiest of my life :
you are aware that i am no way blamable in this matter .
that’s what you’ll come to fifty years hence :
but i bid him fetch mr kenneth , and he should go in and see him .
“ i’m afraid , ellen , you’ll set me down as really wicked ;
“ oh !
“ this is insufferable !
you may also tell him that the mother of linton desired him to remain under my guardianship ;
and mind , particularly , to notice that the sexton obeys my directions concerning the two coffins !
my old enemies have not beaten me ;
catherine had reached her full height ;
what should hinder you from loving them ?
he’s waiting till i come home that he may lock the gate .
“ why , guess !
three minutes’ delay will render it involuntary and ignominious .
“ who’s your master ?
a look of hatred ;
you may laugh , if you will ;
we had all remarked , during some time , that miss linton fretted and pined over something .
i should be sorry to ask you to cross the threshold , for my convenience , on such a night , ” i cried .
at least the minute they had contrived some naughty plan of revenge ;
snivelling again ?
he silently applied the tube to his lips , folded his arms , and puffed away .
“ i’ll marry him within this hour , if i may go to thrushcross grange afterwards .
linton looked terrified .
but there was a sickly peevishness in his aspect that edgar linton never had .
with streaming face and an expression of agony , linton had thrown his nerveless frame along the ground :
about midnight , while we still sat up , the storm came rattling over the heights in full fury .
“ devil daddy , ” was his answer .
joseph remained to hector over tenants and labourers ;
“ ellen , i’m tired .
the grey church looked greyer , and the lonely churchyard lonelier .
“ on my second visit linton seemed in lively spirits ;
and i left her , as merry as she could be , dividing her food between the little dog and skulker , whose nose she pinched as he ate ;
look , heathcliff !
they met , and the master , irritated at seeing him clean and cheerful , or , perhaps , eager to keep his promise to mrs linton , shoved him back with a sudden thrust , and angrily bade joseph “ keep the fellow out of the room send him into the garret till dinner is over .
mr heathcliff started ;
“ not i !
and i whispered my companion to obey :
well , there was cause .
and kindling a spark of spirit in the vacant blue eyes of the lintons a dim reflection from her own enchanting face .
” said catherine , leaning back , and returning his look with a suddenly clouded brow :
however , catherine would not be persuaded into tranquillity .
when mr heathcliff , pushing me forward , exclaimed “ my house is not stricken with the plague , nelly ;
i thought she was going mad , and i begged joseph to run for the doctor .
“ no , ” he answered .
earnshaw sat , morose as usual , at the chimney corner , and my little mistress was beguiling an idle hour with drawing pictures on the window-panes , varying her amusement by smothered bursts of songs , and whispered ejaculations , and quick glances of annoyance and impatience in the direction of her cousin , who steadfastly smoked , and looked into the grate .
“ unless you will , here i go .
my great miseries in this world have been heathcliff’s miseries , and i watched and felt each from the beginning :
i could have told heathcliff’s history , all that you need hear , in half a dozen words .
master heathcliff , much irritated , asserted her relation was false .
traitor !
there’s harm in being too soft , and now it’s come to this .
i have no pity !
“ now , ” said he , with curbed ferocity , “ i’m getting angry and if you don’t command that paltry spirit of yours damn you !
and on the third from recovering my company she complained of a headache , and left me .
“ yes ;
i desire an explanation :
she had never spoken a word to her sister-in-law for three days ;
but altered !
he had sold himself to mr heathcliff :
in the absence of clear proofs of his condition , i deemed it best to abstain from noticing his curious conduct ;
but he shrieked so shockingly that i dared not proceed .
a sensible man ought to find sufficient company in himself .
” he said .
i cannot help it ;
what a blank , dreary mind he must have !
but it brought on the cough , and he took to his ordinary resource of moaning and weeping , and catherine rebuked me .
catherine reflected an instant , with knitted brows she found it needful to smooth the way for an intrusion .
and she had precious little rest :
i was all flour making the christmas cake , and it would not have done to give me a hug ;
is it ?
tell her what heathcliff is :
there she lay dashing her head against the arm of the sofa , and grinding her teeth , so that you might fancy she would crash them to splinters !
he was about to enlarge further , but the two youngsters broke into a noisy fit of merriment :
and , moreover , i was informed that if i would but have the manners to stand aside , my rival , as she will have herself to be , would shoot a shaft into your soul that would fix you for ever , and send my image into eternal oblivion !
catherine brought another to lay above it .
“ they are going to the grange , then ?
i made up my mind for broken bones , at least ;
“ well , close the curtains , nelly , ” she said ;
” asked catherine , considerably crestfallen .
he can girn a laugh as well ’s onybody at a raight divil’s jest .
next week , if you can , we’ll ride down to the grange park , and try mine .
and hareton is the last of them , as our miss cathy is of us i mean , of the lintons .
my little pony minny shall take me some time .
for every wrench of agony return a wrench :
surly , and dumb , and deaf to every attempt at moving his sense of justice or compassion .
“ weel done , miss cathy !
the little party recovered its equanimity at sight of the fragrant feast .
i rang the bell , and committed it to a servant’s care ;
and what did i do ?
but do you imagine that i shall leave catherine to his duty and humanity ?
i got the dish-cloth , and rather spitefully scrubbed edgar’s nose and mouth , affirming it served him right for meddling .
it was not .
“ i wish to make some legal inquiries of him while i can bestow a thought on those matters , and while i can act calmly .
so his master dived down to him , leaving me vis-à-vis the ruffianly bitch and a pair of grim shaggy sheep-dogs , who shared with her a jealous guardianship over all my movements .
so don’t talk of our separation again :
heathcliff , as i thought , walked through to the barn .
i doubt it too much to venture my tranquillity by running into temptation :
and , five minutes afterwards , the entrance of heathcliff relieved me , in some measure , from my uncomfortable state .
she grudged each moment that did not find her bending over his pillow , or seated by his side .
your courage is well disguised :
the eyes were large and serious ;
i hav’n’t shown it yet , but you needn’t imagine i shall keep your ridiculous secrets .
cut on its north side , on the east , g .
he says she’s been in a consumption these many months .
in reality , my chief motive was seeing mr heathcliff .
he would stand hindley’s blows without winking or shedding a tear , and my pinches moved him only to draw in a breath and open his eyes , as if he had hurt himself by accident , and nobody was to blame .
“ there damn it !
to try to hinder me from entering .
” the kirk , (you know , has no minister now , explained mrs dean ;
i was surprised to see heathcliff there also .
take him , and be damned , you beggarly interloper !
it is our secret .
i’d rather have seen him gnash his teeth than smile so .
and you won’t .
she came in and lay down on the settle , all soaked as she was , turning her face to the back , and putting her hands before it .
he remarked that it was not of any moment , only she must beware of coming to her brother :
for she lingered , viewing with troubled eyes the features of the speaker , too stern to express his inward deceit .
whatever reason he may have for ordering linton to undergo this penance .
i hurried out in a foolish state of dread , and said to joseph “ the master wishes you to take him a light and rekindle the fire .
the fancied object was not fixed , either :
(he it was .) “ i don’t hate my son , i suppose ;
imploring her to say , she should be happy with young heathcliff .
we neither of us lay down :
she affirmed he would be better in a bit , but he couldn’t do with that shrieking and din ;
it drove her desperate .
which i hope went a little deeper than his missile .
then i said i must go first , and tell of her arrival ;
and though in the beginning she either left it at his approach , or quietly joined in my occupations , and shunned remarking or addressing him and though he was always as sullen and silent as possible after a while , she changed her behaviour , and became incapable of letting him alone :
“ oh , i have nothing , ” i replied , thinking it best to speak the truth at once .
now , was it not the depth of absurdity of genuine idiocy , for that pitiful , slavish , mean-minded brach to dream that i could love her ?
” she repeated , angrily .
the first day or two my charge sat in a corner of the library , too sad for either reading or playing :
but when i proceeded to open a place with the poker the sacrifice was too painful to be borne .
this spectacle drove me back immediately ;
“ how would you like it ?
sixty miles each way , that is a long spell !
“ it was no hint that your company was superfluous ;
i’m sure she made some speech of the kind ;
i thought i had cured you of laughing .
and , if he likes , he may look out for another tenant to take the place after october .
” i asked .
and so i opened and closed them a hundred times a night to be always disappointed !
i want to frighten him .
hindley wanted some water , and i handed him a glass , and asked him how he was .
he’s getten t’ raight sperrit in him !
begone , witch , and get your things !
the clouded windows of hell flashed a moment towards me ;
i beg your pardon , nell .
” he answered , following her eye and snatching away his hand .
the road thither wound close by wuthering heights .
every movement woke a new sentiment in her .
i nobbut wish he may .
heathcliff placed his fists , out of temptation , in his pockets ;
i’m sure you would have as much pleasure as i in witnessing the conclusion of the fiend’s existence ;
heathcliff advanced to the hearth .
she learned rapidly and eagerly , and did honour to his teaching .
i persuaded him easily to let me lay the blame of his bruises on the horse :
as true as i live , he’s dying for you ;
“ walking or riding :
“ so , ” i exclaimed , “ miss catherine , you are tolerably far on , it seems :
but the doctor says missis must go :
poorer , i’ll be bound :
“ hush !
“ what could i ha’ done ?’ began earnshaw .
dree , and dreary !
” he said .
bang , bang .
“ send that over to-morrow , ” said heathcliff to me ;
the present is hardly worth accepting ;
so he had as good leave his guns and bits of indoor work alone , while she stayed .
the chapel , the only building she had approached or entered , except her own home .
but it was one of their chief amusements to run away to the moors in the morning and remain there all day , and the after punishment grew a mere thing to laugh at .
and his attachment sprang from its relation to her , far more than from its being his own .
oh , for shame !
they had a smart battle , before their owners could separate them :
since then , i’ve told linton he must whisper his bitter things .
time stagnates here :
“ walk down stairs at once , and repeat to your master what i have said .
i left him there , and proceeded down the valley alone .
“ let me alone , at least , ” said he ;
“ nelly , will you keep a secret for me ?
“ yes , ” i cried :
i mounted minny , and urged her to a trot ;
” i mused .
he was painfully jealous lest a word should be spoken amiss to him ;
he stood by the fire , his back towards me , just finishing a stormy scene with poor zillah ;
i’ve been haunted , nelly !
by evening she seemed greatly exhausted ;
but when the children fell ill of the measles , and i had to tend them , and take on me the cares of a woman at once , i changed my idea .
and then i inquired what had urged her to escape from wuthering heights in such an unlikely plight , and where she meant to go , as she refused remaining with us .
he pressed its hand , and kissed the sarcastic , savage face that every one else shrank from contemplating ;
“ there , miss cathy !
it is the heavy weather and heat that make me dull ;
her father invariably spent that day alone in the library ;
while i groped from step to step , collecting the shattered earthenware , and drying the spatters of milk from the banister with my pocket-handkerchief .
“ you may do without your pony :
besides , of all , he has selected my favourite pieces that i love the most to repeat , as if out of deliberate malice .
isabella was not asked .
the master’s bad ways and bad companions formed a pretty example for catherine and heathcliff .
the soil was too loose for the latter ;
” i cried , forgetting instantaneously my foolish fears .
he seemed studying the familiar landscape with a stranger’s and an artist’s interest .
but both their minds tending to the same point one loving and desiring to esteem , and the other loving and desiring to be esteemed they contrived in the end to reach it .
only afterwards show him what you are , imp of satan .
though i could not but suspect , i was still surprised to discover that they were a mass of correspondence daily almost , it must have been from linton heathcliff :
still she did not resemble her :
being well aware of his hard position in his family .
“ oh !
the floor was of smooth , white stone ;
earnshaw rose , too , and bid her come to the settle , and sit close by the fire :
and if all else remained , and he were annihilated , the universe would turn to a mighty stranger :
the fingers relaxed , i snatched mine through the hole , hurriedly piled the books up in a pyramid against it , and stopped my ears to exclude the lamentable prayer .
“ delectably !
a splinter cut his arm , and he lost a good deal of blood before he could reach home .
“ i love the ground under his feet , and the air over his head , and everything he touches , and every word he says .
“ i’m not going to , ” she answered .
it gave no sign of being ;
i slid back the panelled sides , got in with my light , pulled them together again , and felt secure against the vigilance of heathcliff , and every one else .
i’ll stay with you .
linton and i ;
the day she was buried , there came a fall of snow .
can’t you fancy the conclusions he’ll draw ?
and , worse than all , the terrible intimation of kenneth that i need not expect to be out of doors till spring !
a source of little visible delight , but necessary .
it is as much as you can expect of a poor man’s daughter .
” ere long , i heard the click of the latch , and catherine flew upstairs , breathless and wild ;
“ how dreary life gets over in that house !
i threw back the lattice , and presently the room filled with sweet scents from the garden ;
and then i’ve shut myself in quick , for fear of being moved to interfere .
before you leave this house , i must exact a promise from you that you’ll get me an interview with her :
and confine your insolence to her ears .
the bed-clothes dripped , and he was perfectly still .
my assistant tucked in his tail , and pressed to the wall ;
i lifted hareton in my arms , and walked off to the kitchen with him , leaving the door of communication open , for i was curious to watch how they would settle their disagreement .
and don’t remind me of your existence again .
“ spiteful , cruel thing !
“ his strong head will keep him from danger ;
monster !
we cannot remain five minutes longer .
and , while waiting in the yard below , i meditated this plan just to have one glimpse of your face , a stare of surprise , perhaps , and pretended pleasure ;
i’ve questioned him twice now , and each time he looked so stupid i think he does not understand me .
though he was neither in danger of losing his senses , nor dying , according to my judgment :
i had not one .
the servants affirmed they had not seen her .
it was well i succeeded in removing her , for at dinner-time appeared the lawyer , having called at wuthering heights to get his instructions how to behave .
it was beautiful a splendid place carpeted with crimson , and crimson-covered chairs and tables , and a pure white ceiling bordered by gold , a shower of glass-drops hanging in silver chains from the centre , and shimmering with little soft tapers .
i confess this blow was greater to me than the shock of mrs linton’s death :
“ now , who is that ?
he coloured up at the news , and cast his eyes over his hands and clothes .
you saw him , i daresay , up yonder .
you did not when you saw him , mr lockwood :
” and she turned her face up to his , and laughed , and answered , “ why cannot you always be a good man , father ?
“ you’d better let the dog alone , ” growled mr heathcliff in unison , checking fiercer demonstrations with a punch of his foot .
and casting back a look that cut my heart , she obeyed .
then the latch was raised and fell :
but i have a fancy to try my hand at rearing a young one ;
while enjoying a month of fine weather at the sea-coast , i was thrown into the company of a most fascinating creature :
only i’m so pleased i can’t show it !
he had been greatly tried , during the journey , i felt convinced , by his fretful ailing charge .
i wonder will he have the heart to find a plausible excuse for making love to miss , when he told you he hated her ?
catherine and isabella were sitting in the library , on hostile terms , but silent :
not let me come to the grange ?
“ and you told a deliberate untruth !
if he loved with all the powers of his puny being , he couldn’t love as much in eighty years as i could in a day .
answers to documents forwarded by her .
i doubt whether i am not altogether as worthless as he calls me , frequently ;
“ nor one so careful of hisseln .
he was always greedy ;
“ stop , my good friend !
“ thou art the man !
a hideous notion struck me :
and he’ll be under the sod before summer , unless you restore him !
the master had retired to rest before we came in .
that is not my heathcliff .
their door was ajar , i saw they had never lain down , though it was past midnight ;
he did not hit the right room directly :
” said her new father .
“ who , then ?
“ the roads will be buried already ;
it was about the period that my narrative has reached :
but then he does his best apparently to make the least of his advantages .
lie down and finish out the night , since you are here ;
the weather was sweet and warm , the grass as green as showers and sun could make it , and the two dwarf apple-trees near the southern wall in full bloom .
i’ve seen none like edgar .
or , possibly , reminded , by her voice and glance , of the person from whom she inherited it .
“ if i war yah , maister , i’d just slam t’ boards i’ their faces all on ’em , gentle and simple !
i had a long talk with zillah about six weeks ago , a little before you came , one day when we foregathered on the moor ;
” she said , suddenly , after some minutes’ reflection .
“ mr lockwood , ” he added , “ you may go into my room :
his eyes met mine so keen and fierce , i started ;
“ i am afraid , nelly , i shall lose my labour , ” he muttered to me .
“ and my money , ” she continued ;
it is merely a beginning of what he shall suffer , though .
i got up and walked into the court to seek him .
“ i’m afraid , mrs heathcliff , the door must bear the consequence of your servants’ leisure attendance :
” he cried , savagely .
you sha’n’t scowl at me !
but when papa was gone , she made me come to the window and showed me her cheek cut on the inside , against her teeth , and her mouth filling with blood ;
why am i so changed ?
to pacify her i held the casement ajar a few seconds .
if edgar linton meets me , i shall not hesitate to knock him down , and give him enough to insure his quiescence while i stay .
turning joseph’s religious curses into ridicule , baiting me , and doing just what her father hated most showing how her pretended insolence , which he thought real , had more power over heathcliff than his kindness :
“ is that little linton ?
it will correct you of feigning more valour than you possess .
“ but why have i not heard of him before ?
cathy entered by the casement-window of the drawing-room , and glided noiselessly up to where i awaited her .
that sounds as if i had been labouring the whole time only to exhibit a fine trait of magnanimity .
he let go , thundering one of his horrid curses , and i galloped home more than half out of my senses .
” he exclaimed .
twice , or thrice , hindley’s manifestation of scorn , while his father was near , roused the old man to a fury :
ellen , he’ll think we’re lost .
one fine summer morning it was the beginning of harvest , i remember mr earnshaw , the old master , came downstairs , dressed for a journey ;
she ran back in terror , knelt down , and cried , and soothed , and entreated , till he grew quiet from lack of breath :
then it was overcast afresh , and he sighed .
my brother lost some money to him , and , finding him plentifully supplied , he requested that he would come again in the evening :
mr heathcliff sat at a table , turning over some papers in his pocket-book ;
catherine and he were constant companions still at his seasons of respite from labour ;
to be sure , one might have doubted , after the wayward and impatient existence she had led , whether she merited a haven of peace at last .
and , indeed , i do think it’s time to arrange his visits on another footing .
“ you’ll disorder the handkerchief i have tied round your face , and make the cut bleed again .
he laid them on the table , looked eagerly towards the window , then rose and went out .
oh , mr lockwood , i cannot express what a terrible start i got by the momentary view !
“ that for the third time , you dunce !
i found him smoothing the glossy coat of the new pony in the stable , and feeding the other beasts , according to custom .
she who was always “ love , ” and “ darling , ” and “ queen , ” and “ angel , ” with everybody at the grange , to be insulted so shockingly by a stranger !
to feed it with sugar and milk , and take care of it day and night .
“ yes , and it worries me , and i must let it out !
an exile , and outcast , thenceforth , from what had been my world .
as he was the first to injure , make him the first to implore pardon ;
she kept wandering to and fro , from the gate to the door , in a state of agitation which permitted no repose ;
so intimate that i think it strange you won’t come and speak to me .
i sobbed and wept so that my eyes were almost blind ;
” exclaimed heathcliff , in much agitation .
” i said to myself .
nelly , you think you are better and more fortunate than i ;
” asked heathcliff , “ and what are you doing ?
“ he’s in the court , ” he replied , “ talking to doctor kenneth ;
and , that accomplished , he had no further immediate fears .
“ they are not mine , ” said the amiable hostess , more repellingly than heathcliff himself could have replied .
though his actual age was thirty-nine , one would have called him ten years younger , at least .
catherine linton was her maiden name .
” she cried gleefully .
in fact , it formed a little closet , and the ledge of a window , which it enclosed , served as a table .
whether still on earth or now in heaven , her spirit is at home with god !
“ i shall ask him what he wants first , ” i said , in considerable trepidation .
an early ride on such a beautiful morning is much preferable to an hour’s more sleep .
so i got up and left him .
“ they humour you :
she was hardly six years old , but she could ride any horse in the stable , and she chose a whip .
i want none of your prying at my house !
“ i desire no further advice from you , ” answered mr linton .
and the poor thing remained perfectly quiet wherever i chose to put him .
but , as certainly as you perceive the approach to some substantial body in the dark , though it cannot be discerned , so certainly i felt that cathy was there :
the first time she left her chamber was at the commencement of the following march .
it appeared that he would not understand , though i spoke to him ;
it will do you good :
my resting-place , where i’m bound before spring is over !
and yon bonny lad heathcliff , yah mind , he’s a rare ’un .
and at length permitted me to go .
she lay still now , her face bathed in tears .
he’ll not scold me , ellen he’s never cross , like you !
“ hey , throttler , lad !
and , just about eleven o’clock , the door-latch was raised quietly , and in stepped the master .
“ as bad as any marred child :
have mercy on this unfortunate boy , if you care nothing for yourself !
at last , we agreed to try both , as soon as the right weather came ;
“ somebody’s love comes short in her case , obviously ;
the unfortunate lad is the only one in all this parish that does not guess how he has been cheated .
i’ll not stay here !
heathcliff glanced at me with an ill-meaning smile , expressing his acquaintance with the party , and , consequently , his malevolence towards it , and demanded who “ papa ” was ?
it struck me directly she must have started for penistone crags .
shoo sits watching for ye i’ t’ kitchen ;
“ let me take that pipe , ” she said , cautiously advancing her hand and abstracting it from his mouth .
“ shall you and i be friends , hareton ?
it haunted me on my return to the neighbourhood last summer ;
the little witch put a mock malignity into her beautiful eyes , and joseph , trembling with sincere horror , hurried out , praying , and ejaculating “ wicked ” as he went .
and i grind with greater energy in proportion to the increase of pain .
and , while her eyes sparkled joyfully when the dogs came bounding up to welcome her , she dared hardly touch them lest they should fawn upon her splendid garments .
he wondered how i could want the company of anybody else .
so deep and sensitive was his aversion , that he refrained from going anywhere where he was likely to see or hear of heathcliff .
and we’ll see what your father says to such loving .
and he had evidently great difficulty in sustaining any kind of conversation .
who could not comprehend how her remarks should have produced such an exhibition of bad temper .
my communication with heathcliff’s family shall be as sparing as his with mine .
and doubtless my brother’s covetousness will prompt him to accept the terms :
you were really sorry for me , were you ?
catherine amused herself with dancing to and fro before the door , while i tried all the large keys in succession .
we mounted to the garrets ;
step in and rest you a bit .
i said you must let isabella alone !
at that earnest appeal he turned to her , looking absolutely desperate .
we’re not going to hurt thee , linton isn’t that thy name ?
you say she never mentions my name , and that i am never mentioned to her .
one state resembles setting a hungry man down to a single dish , on which he may concentrate his entire appetite and do it justice ;
you have not told papa , ellen ?
” i said .
“ it was three servants sent to seek you from the grange , ” said heathcliff , overhearing me .
don’t you like him , ellen ?
should the meanest thing alive slap me on the cheek , i’d not only turn the other , but i’d ask pardon for provoking it ;
why , this is the road upstairs , child !
besides , she hurt me extremely ;
“ i’ve been starved a month and more ,’ she answered , resting on the word as scornful as she could .
it is both mean and presumptuous to add your torture to his !
but he’ll hev his lad ;
and , catherine , you know that i could as soon forget you as my existence !
and you join him against her .
and catherine removed her seat to a corner , and nursed hareton , while i made the supper .
and i’ll scold papa for quarrelling with him .
and i absolutely require to know which you choose .
“ you’re a damned liar , ” began earnshaw :
oh !
but it flashed back , each time more confidently , the undisguised delight he drank from hers .
he hung about me for a while , and having screwed up his courage , exclaimed abruptly “ nelly , make me decent , i’m going to be good .
” exclaimed catherine , furiously .
there was no pleasure in it , he said ;
“ you’ve made me afraid and ashamed of you , ” he continued ;
my first interview with her grieved and shocked me :
he’s barely twenty-seven , it seems ;
get into bed .
my master’s surprise equalled or exceeded mine :
i gazed round for a means of diverting her thoughts .
“ he is not at home then , is he ?
“ i wouldn’t eat or drink here , if i were starving .
and she presently saw fit to retreat to her solitude :
and scarcely likely to reach manhood :
but beware of meeting me with another aspect next time !
whether it were not pleasant familiarity , or what it really was , contempt .
“ and i fear i shall be weather-bound for half an hour , if you can afford me shelter during that space .
i must go home .
i could do it ;
“ i’d forgotten they were joseph’s , ” answered earnshaw , rather puzzled ;
“ he hates you they all hate you that’s the truth !
but then he won’t go into danger of temptation :
cathy stole to his room to inquire how he was ;
but i’ve been as happy musing by myself among those stones , under that old church :
on the morning of a fine june day my first bonny little nursling , and the last of the ancient earnshaw stock , was born .
” continued she , staring at her reflection in a mirror hanging against the opposite wall .
i’ll be back again directly .
too ill to quit her room ;
i’d rather be three months ill , than hear you frame a deliberate lie .
he’s noan feared o’ t’ bench o’ judges , norther paul , nur peter , nur john , nur matthew , nor noan on ’em , not he !
and we’ll soon persuade her to keep the visit secret :
but i beseech you to explain , if you can , what i have married :
owing , i suppose , to the sudden storm .
she stepped close up ;
” “ at thrushcross grange , ” he answered ;
light entered from its unclosed windows ;
perhaps you have never remarked that their eyes are precisely similar , and they are those of catherine earnshaw .
and lives in his own house as a servant , deprived of the advantage of wages :
this is not much connected with miss isabella’s affair :
and yet you have not told me whether i’m right .
i began to doubt whether he were a servant or not :
that was their pleasure !
before passing the threshold , i paused to admire a quantity of grotesque carving lavished over the front , and especially about the principal door ;
“ it requires some study ;
how the devil is he so like ?
” she slipped the gold ring from her third finger , and threw it on the floor .
and hour after hour he would sit beside her , tracing the gradual return to bodily health , and flattering his too sanguine hopes with the illusion that her mind would settle back to its right balance also , and she would soon be entirely her former self .
she did laugh as she saw heathcliff pass the window .
i saw he meant to give her his company ;
“ i’m ill to-night , catherine , love ,’ he said ;
cathy would fain have taken one glance , but her father told her to come , and they walked together up the park , while i hastened before to prepare the servants .
no , she felt small trouble regarding any subject , save her own concerns .
excepting a few provincialisms of slight consequence , you have no marks of the manners which i am habituated to consider as peculiar to your class .
she consented , rather unwillingly , i fancied ;
i hope he will not die before i do !
i saw the old man-servant shared largely in his master’s scorn of the child ;
he descended , nearly as eager as herself ;
“ but he left me by the kitchen door ;
may i not , ellen ?
she was rather thin , but young , and fresh-complexioned , and her eyes sparkled as bright as diamonds .
“ where should good news come from to me ?
i looked round impatiently i felt her by me i could almost see her , and yet i could not !
her husband had succeeded in soothing the excess of frenzy ;
“ earnshaw accomplished this ere his guest reached the front ;
” exclaimed mrs linton , in amazement .
for the doors were shut , and i had seen nobody on approaching the steps .
i prognosticate for myself an obstinate cold , at least .
“ and what if she should have slipped in clambering among them , ” i reflected , “ and been killed , or broken some of her bones ?
for himself , he grew desperate :
gimmerton was an unsubstantial name in her ears ;
“ where is miss catherine ?
and miss isabella came , summoned by the bell ;
because there is no reason for my lingering another minute , if you persist in your stubborn ill-nature !
shame on ye !
catherine came to me , one morning , at eight o’clock , and said she was that day an arabian merchant , going to cross the desert with his caravan ;
he drew it nearer , and then rested his arms on the table , and looked at the opposite wall , as i supposed , surveying one particular portion , up and down , with glittering , restless eyes , and with such eager interest that he stopped breathing during half a minute together .
wisht !
that’s her account , at least :
“ i see in you , nelly , ” she continued dreamily , “ an aged woman :
” i cried .
“ a letter from your old acquaintance , the housekeeper at the grange , ” i answered ;
“ but you won’t let him strike me ?
” commenced the master .
the naughty thing never made her appearance at tea .
and then my home is not here .
catherine pushed another to him , and wiped her face .
i presume you grew weary of the amusement and dropped it , didn’t you ?
but should linton be unworthy only a feeble tool to his father i cannot abandon her to him !
meantime , our young companion , who sat too removed from us to hear what was said , began to evince symptoms of uneasiness , probably repenting that he had denied himself the treat of catherine’s society for fear of a little fatigue .
where is the obstacle ?
however , nelly , i shall oblige you to listen :
i’m stalled of doing naught ;
will you just turn this nab of heath , and walk into my house ?
he didn’t pray for catherine’s soul to haunt him .
and i was better to-day :
i went to the heights as i proposed :
a nothing vexed him ;
the lord forgie us !
here we are the same as anywhere else , when you get to know us , ” observed mrs dean , somewhat puzzled at my speech .
“ indeed .
and started , and trembled , and , at last , fell a-weeping and when i asked what was the matter , answered , she didn’t know ;
you have no reason to dislike me , you allow , yourself .
that is , as much a gentleman as many a country squire :
i unknotted the handkerchief , and commenced dropping them in from an angle , and the flame curled up the chimney .
“ catherine linton , ” it replied , shiveringly (why did i think of linton ?
what her last illness was , i am not certain :
” cried hindley , bustling in .
then she put a few questions to me concerning the inmates , rational and irrational , of her former home ;
you are my son , then , i’ll tell you ;
at length he summoned hareton from his seat .
so that , instead of a wild , hatless little savage jumping into the house , and rushing to squeeze us all breathless , there lighted from a handsome black pony a very dignified person , with brown ringlets falling from the cover of a feathered beaver , and a long cloth habit , which she was obliged to hold up with both hands that she might sail in .
are you cherishing the notion that anybody , let alone miss catherine linton , would have you for a husband ?
but it is not my business .
i hope it will not come out when you are gone !
i endeavoured to stop her thoughtless tongue .
and troubles too , ” she said .
but she was all bewildered ;
“ you sha’n’t contradict me .
but i preferred giving him my own , and that satisfied him better .
for i wasn’t reasonable enough to feel my injustice , and the mistress never put in a word on his behalf when she saw him wronged .
“ you’ll find him not so pliable as you calculate upon :
where is the maid-servant ?
then , both began searching their father’s pockets for the presents he had promised them .
now return to your old employments and amusements , and think no more about them .
“ i never saw heathcliff last night , ” answered catherine , beginning to sob bitterly :
he needn’t have raised that tale :
” he asked .
i shall have another happy evening , i thought to myself ;
he thought of catherine ;
don’t interrupt me .
what did i say , nelly ?
but no catherine could i detect , far or near .
the same question was repeated at dinner and tea ;
“ what good do i get ?
he’s forgotten all i’ve done for him , and made on him , and goan and riven up a whole row o’ t’ grandest currant-trees i’ t’ garden !
i’m of the busy world , and to its arms i must return .
the ground bare , and the road hard and dry .
earnshaw and i , the sexton , and six men to carry the coffin , comprehended the whole attendance .
” she cried , gaily , jumping up and running to my side .
because his father returned the day after .
no sweeping and dusting , only good fire and dry sheets were necessary .
as he both looked and felt like an assassin , he couldn’t exactly find that ;
my anger was greater than my astonishment for a minute .
i daresay you’ll catch a bad cold , or a fever :
for a moment i considered it absurd that i should need such a weapon to gain admittance into my own residence .
sit ye down , ill childer !
she should not be with him , if he had to keep her himself .
he had a sweet , low manner of speaking , and pronounced his words as you do :
pretty loving , indeed !
mr linton was alarmed and distressed , more than he would acknowledge to me .
“ i wish she felt as i do , ” he replied :
was not the reverend jabez branderham akin to you on the mother’s side ?
“ oh , edgar , edgar !
in old days this would win you knighthood !
he said to me , a few days afterwards , i wish my nephew would write , ellen , or call .
i’ve said i did not love her , and rather relished mortifying her vanity now and then :
but you’ll not talk of what i tell you ;
the present catherine has no other likeness to her , except a breadth of forehead , and a certain arch of the nostril that makes her appear rather haughty , whether she will or not .
not one in a hundred would weep at losing a relation they had just seen twice , for two afternoons .
telling him plainly that his strange talk and manner frightened me , and i had neither the nerve nor the will to be his companion alone .
while they exchanged caresses i took a peep in to see after linton .
not liking to show him that i had heard the conflict , i continued my toilette rather noisily , looked at my watch , and soliloquised on the length of the night :
“ get up , you idle boy !
“ you wished me away , because you knew i liked to be there !
“ i say , mr heathcliff , ” i replied , “ you must not :
and linton’s is as different as a moonbeam from lightning , or frost from fire .
and , i thought , i rose and endeavoured to unhasp the casement .
she could neither eat nor drink .
” i ejaculated , mentally , “ you deserve perpetual isolation from your species for your churlish inhospitality .
at fifteen she was the queen of the country-side ;
” and chucked it off .
that the lord has touched his heart , and he is saved so as by fire .’ i’m puzzled to detect signs of the favourable change :
“ five minutes ago hareton seemed a personification of my youth , not a human being ;
i have hardly seen him at all .
“ oh , no , ” wept the young lady ;
they seemed to sneer at my attempts ;
she’s glad to be obliged to stay , i’m certain .
you prove it .
she shut herself into linton’s room , and remained till morning .
i was summoned to wuthering heights , within a fortnight of your leaving us , she said ;
she was too much in earnest , however , to suffer contradiction ;
“ but aunt isabella was younger than papa , ” she remarked , gazing up with timid hope to seek further consolation .
and it was impossible , however ill-tempered they might be , that the universal scowl they wore was their every-day countenance .
but i wouldn’t turn back ;
i took a seat at the end of the hearthstone opposite that towards which my landlord advanced , and filled up an interval of silence by attempting to caress the canine mother , who had left her nursery , and was sneaking wolfishly to the back of my legs , her lip curled up , and her white teeth watering for a snatch .
“ nelly , there is a strange change approaching ;
you may come , if you will , but you must not mention it .
but the heat did not hinder me from enjoying the delightful scenery above and below :
and many a time i’ve cried to myself to watch them growing more reckless daily , and i not daring to speak a syllable , for fear of losing the small power i still retained over the unfriended creatures .
for he would not stir .
“ you shouldn’t lie till ten .
my heart’s darling !
she stamped her foot , wavered a moment , and then , irresistibly impelled by the naughty spirit within her , slapped me on the cheek :
and the servants were all up long before the usual hour , moving through the house with stealthy tread , and exchanging whispers as they encountered each other in their vocations .
tell the truth , heathcliff !
i have nothing to regret ;
“ you lie , cathy , no doubt , ” answered her brother , “ and you are a confounded simpleton !
and the crew , instead of trying to save her , rushed into riot and confusion , leaving no hope for their luckless vessel .
“ i’ll smash it !
next morning i answered the letter by a slip of paper , inscribed , “ master heathcliff is requested to send no more notes to miss linton , as she will not receive them .
” i said .
cathy stayed upstairs a fortnight , according to zillah ;
not among the lintons , mind , under the chapel-roof , but in the open air , with a head-stone ;
he laboured under a severe sense of mortification and wrath , which it was no easy task to suppress .
” he asked .
“ master heathcliff , ” i resumed , “ have you forgotten all catherine’s kindness to you last winter , when you affirmed you loved her , and when she brought you books and sung you songs , and came many a time through wind and snow to see you ?
and , as i took my morning walk round the house , i observed the master’s window swinging open , and the rain driving straight in .
i’m certain you’ll need it .
“ hareton , hareton , hareton !
i thought , once , i would have stayed there :
he didn’t notice me , and yet he smiled .
but you’ve caught cold :
i supposed it one of the maids , and i cried “ have done !
i feel i shall not rest if i go to bed ;
i am happy and papa , dear , dear papa !
and his black , short pipe in his mouth .
she seated herself by me again :
“ i guess she is ;
indeed , by her face , you would rather have surmised an awful calamity .
and two hours after the mother died , having never recovered sufficient consciousness to miss heathcliff , or know edgar .
he bid her add a spoonful of wine from a bottle on the table ;
you’ll get rid of an annoyance .
“ he is not coming , ” i interposed , framing a bit of a lie .
“ i told you i did , ” he replied impatiently .
“ it is brief advice , but as sound as i can give .
anybody else would have been incapable of regarding the childish act with sternness , but he scowled on her and muttered “ oh !
she insisted on my fulfilling her directions , before she would let me touch her ;
we were in the library , the master having gone to bed :
and there he’ll sit , wrapped in his furred cloak in his chair by the fire , with some toast and water or other slop on the hob to sip at ;
you can make me so happy by speaking that little word .
and she never would represent him as worse than he is .
i followed .
” and he took his wife in his arms , and looked at her with anguish .
“ cathy , are you busy this afternoon ?
“ i know where i wish to go ;
to extinguish , if possible , that frightful , life-like gaze of exultation before any one else beheld it .
“ it is not i who hate you , it is you who hate me !
“ there’s a little cake for each of you , nearly enough ;
” i whispered ;
on returning , i whispered to catherine that he had heard a good part of what she said , i was sure ;
and he is yet .
that was yesterday i said they were mine , too ;
he recovered it speedily .
oh , my dear mary , look here !
she kissed me gently :
in which i partook , though i counselled her not to say much ;
“ that’s your father’s tale , too , i suppose .
he sat down in the settle very quiet , and she continued turning over her volumes another half hour ;
will hathecliff bide sich bonny ways , think ye ?
at length i resolved on making an excuse to ask if they would have the candles lighted , and i opened the door .
and her husband persisted doggedly , nay , furiously , in affirming her health improved every day .
“ there’s the coachman and the two gardeners ;
i fancied that as they consumed , he recalled the pleasure they had already imparted , and the triumph and ever-increasing pleasure he had anticipated from them ;
if iver i seed a seeght loike this !
your pride cannot blind god !
it glowed delightfully in the radiance of an immense fire , compounded of coal , peat , and wood ;
“ she keeps her own counsel !
it is strong enough to make me feel pretty certain that he would not chase me over england , supposing i contrived a clear escape ;
even though i should wake a domestic storm , by thwarting mrs linton’s pleasure .
“ nelly is my hidden enemy .
“ unless you be a fiend , help her first then you shall speak to me !
and that violence does not alarm me .
my surprise and perplexity were great on discovering , by touch more than vision , miss isabella’s springer , fanny , suspended by a handkerchief , and nearly at its last gasp .
i obeyed , so far as to quit the chamber ;
she had not reckoned on his taking it into his head to be idle ;
she quitted the apartment ;
put your handkerchief away don’t snivel before me .
i questioned with myself where must i turn for comfort ?
“ to say that i was married , i did write you saw the note .
“ rich , sir !
“ i didn’t strike you !
un’ the knave , why he can caint his brass , un’ ate , un’ sleep , un’ off to his neighbour’s to gossip wi’ t’ wife .
what took you into the rain ?
i couldn’t count the number of falls i’ve had .
and as she had no temptation to show her rough side in their company , and had the sense to be ashamed of being rude where she experienced such invariable courtesy , she imposed unwittingly on the old lady and gentleman by her ingenious cordiality ;
“ he took the implements which i described to you in my letter from his breast , and would have turned down the candle .
he swore it was not , nor ever should be , mine ;
i protested against playing that treacherous part in my employer’s house :
when he is not , as was the case this week , i establish a table and chair at one corner of the house fire , and never mind how mr earnshaw may occupy himself ;
“ i am by myself .
as sure as i’m living , i’ll break the brat’s neck .
“ no , ” said linton , with a gaze of vacant fear .
“ and at the end of it to be flighted to death !
and it will be wickedly ungrateful if you refuse .
shouldn’t they have been happy ?
he sent after me a faint catherine !’ he did not reckon on being answered so :
you won’t believe me , then ?
it was half-past six ;
and , instead of melting into tears because i said that heathcliff was now worthy of anyone’s regard , and it would honour the first gentleman in the country to be his friend , he ought to have said it for me , and been delighted from sympathy .
“ and supposing you persevered in your obstinate fast , and died by that means , and they refused to bury you in the precincts of the kirk ?
he then came and brought his chair to the other side of my table , leaning over it , and searching in my eyes for a sympathy with the burning hate that gleamed from his :
” then turning to catherine , who was there , and who drew behind me at his approach , he added , half sneeringly , “ will you come , chuck ?
i love him better than myself , ellen ;
he could not stand a steady gaze from her eyes , though they were just his own .
having no excuse for lingering longer , i slipped out , while linton was engaged in timidly rebuffing the advances of a friendly sheep-dog .
” she exclaimed .
i seated myself in a chair , and rocked to and fro , passing harsh judgment on my many derelictions of duty ;
i remember the master , before he fell into a doze , stroking her bonny hair it pleased him rarely to see her gentle and saying , “ why canst thou not always be a good lass , cathy ?
and , i remember , that accursed earnshaw and my wife opposed my entrance .
young earnshaw was altered considerably in the three years of his absence .
you know you lie to say i have killed you :
” she demanded , growing more irritated .
and other dogs haunted other recesses .
“ why didn’t you come before ?
he made no reply to this adjuration ;
“ you should have opened a lattice and called out :
” said catherine , perceiving her hesitate to complete the sentence .
“ i’m sorry i hurt you , linton , ” she said at length , racked beyond endurance .
they’ve gone through and through me , like wine through water , and altered the colour of my mind .
“ promise not to be angry , and you shall know the very truth :
i bestow my own attributes over-liberally on him .
edgar , you you leave me !
“ oh , a little further only a little further , ellen , ” was her answer , continually .
you have been compelled to cultivate your reflective faculties for want of occasions for frittering your life away in silly trifles .
he had always been strict and grave with them ;
and what delights me more , my pretty linton will .
a rough sand-pillar , with the letters w .
“ tell mr heathcliff , ” he answered calmly , “ that his son shall come to wuthering heights to-morrow .
and she arrived without adventure to the gate of the farmhouse , when hareton happened to issue forth , attended by some canine followers , who attacked her train .
she continued reading , or seeking for something to read .
and her poor little heart reproached itself for even that passing forgetfulness of its cares .
“ you have a heart and nerves the same as your brother men !
and now , guess what your good children were doing ?
that was the cause of his delay in obeying my master’s summons .
“ you think i speak from wicked selfishness ?
excepting cathy , who got thoroughly drenched for her obstinacy in refusing to take shelter , and standing bonnetless and shawlless to catch as much water as she could with her hair and clothes .
but catherine angrily insisted on silence , and threatened to order me out of the kitchen , if i dared to be so presumptuous as to put in my insolent tongue .
go round by th’ end o’ t’ laith , if ye went to spake to him .
and that he does .
“ there , i’ve found it out at last !
you may fancy a glimpse of the abyss where i grovelled !
“ picturing in me a hero of romance , and expecting unlimited indulgences from my chivalrous devotion .
i thought you were gone .
you’ll get home earlier for the ease ;
various sacks of which articles were piled around , leaving a wide , bare space in the middle .
” he asked authoritatively .
“ is she gone ?
“ i’ll be here next thursday , ” she cried , springing to the saddle .
“ yes .
“ i’m not envious :
and you’ll have a better chance of keeping me underground , when i get there .
“ will you ask her to read to us , zillah ?
then he bid us go upstairs , through the kitchen , to zillah’s chamber ;
“ see here , wife !
“ my affectations !
and no one else had business to bring them there .
you look uncommonly animated .
and i was a fixed unbeliever in any love of a year’s standing .
“ a very agreeable portrait , ” i observed to the house-keeper .
“ you bid him step up , ” he said , addressing me ;
her cousin had shrunk into a corner of the settle , as quiet as a mouse , congratulating himself , i dare say , that the correction had alighted on another than him .
“ can’t read it ?
“ i’m not going to endure the persecutions of your hospitable ancestors again .
and this is one :
a horse , and three camels , personated by a large hound and a couple of pointers .
i should laugh and dance for joy , if i found their absence was the total of my miseries , and the rest was an unnatural dream !
once in your own room , i’ll not come near you :
” she once observed , “ or a cart-horse ?
and our place of meeting had been fixed at the guide-stone , by the cross-roads .
having reached the heights , i rushed eagerly to the door .
next time , master edgar , take the law into your own fists it will give you an appetite !
“ i’ve a pleasure in him , ” he continued , reflecting aloud .
i’m tired i’m stalled , hareton !
the window , however , was narrow , like those below , and the garret trap was safe from our attempts ;
” she exclaimed , with an accent of indignation .
i never feel hurt at the brightness of isabella’s yellow hair and the whiteness of her skin , at her dainty elegance , and the fondness all the family exhibit for her .
he shut and locked it also .
this proceeding aroused the whole hive :
i know .
who would have thought you were born in one year ?
come and take your seat here .
yet i shall have the merit of making it go as far as such poor stuff can go .
she kissed him fervently , and they gazed with wonder at the change time had wrought in the appearance of each .
“ loving !
except thrice before , and twice after you left your room .
“ why did he wish to see me ?
if ye’re feared o’ muckying yer grand silk cloes , spread yer hankerchir o’ t’ top on’t .
when she came , i felt convinced we shouldn’t keep her long ;
i bowed and returned the pledge ;
“ who is , nelly ?
hindley was not there .
my feet were thoroughly wetted ;
he got up and strode to the door :
“ but he has black hair and eyes , and looks sterner ;
ellen , i’ve been very happy with my little cathy :
“ with him :
” observed catherine .
if i don’t floor him now , i shall murder him some time ;
the little rogue thought i had not seen her , and , drawing back , she took her former station by the window , quite demurely .
“ nelly , do you never dream queer dreams ?
his young and fair features were almost as deathlike as those of the form beside him , and almost as fixed :
“ he my cousin !
though still i was moved with a sense of grief at his lot , and a wish that he had been left with us .
and you might spend an hour or two with me in his absence .
and you say she’s sick ;
yet , the instant i listened again , there was the doleful cry moaning on !
you’ll have to seek for her shoes in the bog to-morrow .
you see , mr lockwood , it was easy enough to win mrs heathcliff’s heart .
and joseph swung on to his knees , beseeching the lord to remember the patriarchs noah and lot , and , as in former times , spare the righteous , though he smote the ungodly .
i bowed and waited , thinking she would bid me take a seat .
catherine , by instinct , must have divined it was obdurate perversity , and not dislike , that prompted this dogged conduct ;
“ i know you didn’t like him , ” she answered , repressing a little the intensity of her delight .
“ you have been telling him something , then :
linton was lying on the settle , and half got up to welcome me .
“ and then you’ll leave me , and i shall remain for ever .
yah knaw whet t’ scripture ses .
we were in april then :
her family were of a delicate constitution :
well , we must be for ourselves in the long run ;
i’m not sure whether he were not at the door this moment .
“ there’s no press in the room , and never was , ” said i , resuming my seat , and looping up the curtain that i might watch her .
lonely , like the devil , and envious like him ?
and confounded at his favourite’s endurance of her proximity :
she had resolved to make a pet of her little cousin , as she would have him to be ;
” and if he reproved her , even by a look , you would have thought it a heart-breaking business :
“ yah’s see all t’ bed-rumes thear is yon’s mine .
she showed a good heart , thenceforth , in avoiding both complaints and expressions of antipathy concerning heathcliff ;
but i think he’s safe from her love .
it was dug on a green slope in a corner of the kirkyard , where the wall is so low that heath and bilberry-plants have climbed over it from the moor ;
what shall we do ?
i thought her conduct must be prompted by a species of dreary fun ;
that’s your own age :
what she was , and where she was born , he never informed us :
“ really , miss catherine , how can i know ?
linton lavished on her the kindest caresses , and tried to cheer her by the fondest words ;
but in the evening , when she had retired to her room , and i went to help her to undress , i found her crying , on her knees by the bedside .
no doctor visited the heights , and no one saw master heathcliff to make report of his condition among us .
mr heathcliff having overheard the conversation , as well as i , smiled when he saw him go ;
i dine between twelve and one o’clock ;
“ is he severe to you , master heathcliff ?
and i was fairly beaten in protestations of devotion and admiration :
“ i could not hinder myself :
“ for one hour , ” he pleaded earnestly .
from dinner to tea she would lie in her breeze-rocked cradle , doing nothing except singing old songs my nursery lore to herself , or watching the birds , joint tenants , feed and entice their young ones to fly :
come , come have done , and get to bed .
and don’t stare when the young lady is not looking at you , and be ready to hide your face when she is ;
idle tales , you’ll say , and so say i .
i’m older than he is , you know , and wiser :
come in ;
“ we’ll not begin with your little notes .
but my soul will be on that hill-top before you lay hands on me again .
scarcely were these words uttered when i recollected the association of heathcliff’s with catherine’s name in the book , which had completely slipped from my memory , till thus awakened .
” he cried .
wake up !
not linton’s side , damn him !
there won’t be a happier woman than myself in england !
as it seemed heathcliff could weep on a great occasion like this .
when she did come , heathcliff came with her , and she insisted that i should take him into the kitchen , as my fellow-servant had gone to a neighbour’s , to be removed from the sound of our “ devil’s psalmody , ” as it pleased him to call it .
further reflection suggested this must be hareton , my hareton , not altered greatly since i left him , ten months since .
you say papa will get better , and why shouldn’t he ?
he began to put questions concerning his new home , and its inhabitants , with greater interest and liveliness .
believe that if i might be as sweet , and as kind , and as good as you are , i would be ;
and what a blessing for me should he send heathcliff to his right abode !
but i shall not return till this time next week ;
“ i recommenced cursing don’t be angry , nelly and so robert was ordered to take me off .
he held firm possession , and proved to the attorney who , in his turn , proved it to mr linton that earnshaw had mortgaged every yard of land he owned for cash to supply his mania for gaming ;
she and her husband both took the fever , and died within a few days of each other .
i uttered an ejaculation of discontent at seeing the dismal grate , and commenced shutting the casements , one after another , till i came to his .
and i’ll make her repent it for ever !
when i would have given my life for one kind word , even to see one of your faces , you all kept off .
i wished to go exceedingly ;
“ yes , ” she answered ;
she dropped down on her knees by a chair , and set to weeping in serious earnest .
i warn you to refrain from provoking me , or i’ll ask your abduction as a special favour !
“ and i’m resolved she shall never approach your house with me again , ” i returned , as we reached the gate , where miss cathy waited our coming .
“ no , it was not because i disliked mr heathcliff , but because mr heathcliff dislikes me ;
“ and hareton’s land , and his money , ” pursued the reckless thing .
i shall not sleep for satisfaction .
“ have you been looking for him , as i ordered ?
“ what a realisation of something more romantic than a fairy tale it would have been for mrs linton heathcliff , had she and i struck up an attachment , as her good nurse desired , and migrated together into the stirring atmosphere of the town !
this september i was invited to devastate the moors of a friend in the north , and on my journey to his abode , i unexpectedly came within fifteen miles of gimmerton .
diminishing the grim aspect of his countenance , but imparting a peculiar look of trouble , and a painful appearance of mental tension towards one absorbing subject .
affirming i had never heard the appellation of “ catherine linton ” before , but reading it often over produced an impression which personified itself when i had no longer my imagination under control .
“ and why ?
, because that stood for catherine , and the h .
“ you should have come , instead of writing .
that sounds ill-natured :
“ i care nothing for his anger , ” exclaimed cathy , imagining she would be its object .
nay !
and when i was obliged to go , he begged and entreated me to come the following evening ;
“ why do you love him , miss cathy ?
i’ll look to the rest .
i declined answering mrs dean’s question , which struck me as something heterodox .
” he asked .
that is the most diabolical deed that ever you did .
having weaned her eyes from contemplating the outer darkness , by degrees she centred her attention on him , and discovered who it was that held her .
annoyed at her exposing my kind deed , and fearful lest it should be imagined a missive of my own .
and walked , at dusk , as far as gimmerton kirkyard , where he would frequently prolong his stay beyond midnight .
unless linton make amends for other losses :
“ is he to have any ?
the hollowness round them transforming to haggard wildness the languid expression they once possessed .
and yet , cruel heathcliff !
“ oh , dear !
“ not yet , edgar linton :
i had hard work to make them hear me .
she thinks you are all spies for her husband .
if i imagined you really wished me to marry isabel , i’d cut my throat !
he advanced direct to us , seized linton by the arm , and swung him off the seat .
i ran and peeped , for form’s sake , into isabella’s room ;
you are too prone to covet your neighbour’s goods ;
he had an antipathy to the sound of his voice , and could not do at all with his sitting in the same room with him many minutes together .
” she recommenced , putting on an imploring countenance .
i only told him to leave my horse alone , or else it would kick him .
“ the black press ?
it seemed so dismal to go upstairs , with the wild snow blowing outside , and my thoughts continually reverting to the kirkyard and the new-made grave !
“ and what shall i do when papa and you leave me , and i am by myself ?
time had little altered his person either .
i was cogitating what the mystery might be , and determined catherine should never suffer to benefit him or any one else , by my good will ;
and woods and sounding water , and the whole world awake and wild with joy .
by that means , it could not fall to mr heathcliff should linton die .
i “ never told my love ” vocally ;
“ sorry ?
“ nonsense !
don’t you like him ?
i did not want him to yield , though i could not help being afraid in my heart .
are you linton ?
“ i suppose mr heathcliff does not lodge at the top of the house , does he ?
moreover , i was excited , almost to a pitch of foolishness , through my nerves and brain .
well , if i cannot keep heathcliff for my friend if edgar will be mean and jealous , i’ll try to break their hearts by breaking my own .
and with rapid strides he hurried her into the alley , whose trees concealed them .
still , if looks have language , the merest idiot might have guessed i was over head and ears :
